Sedation of children undergoing dental treatment
Ashley PF, Chaudhary M, Lourenço-Matharu L.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Dec 17;12(12):CD003877.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003877.pub5
PMID: 30566228 | PMCID: PMC6517004

[NOTE: PMC get_full_text_article returned an empty full-text body for this Cochrane
review (typical for Cochrane records). The text below is the structured abstract +
plain-language summary retrieved from PMC. full_text: false — abstract-only.]

ABSTRACT

Background
Children's fear about dental treatment may lead to behaviour management problems for
the dentist, which can be a barrier to the successful dental treatment of children.
Sedation can be used to relieve anxiety and manage behaviour in children undergoing
dental treatment. There is a need to determine from published research which agents,
dosages and regimens are effective. This is the second update of the Cochrane Review
first published in 2005 and previously updated in 2012.

Objectives
To evaluate the efficacy and relative efficacy of conscious sedation agents and dosages
for behaviour management in paediatric dentistry.

Search methods
Cochrane Oral Health's Information Specialist searched the following databases: Cochrane
Oral Health's Trials Register (to 22 February 2018); CENTRAL (2018, Issue 1); MEDLINE
Ovid (1946 to 22 February 2018); and Embase Ovid (1980 to 22 February 2018). ClinicalTrials.gov
and the WHO ICTRP were searched for ongoing trials. No restrictions on language or date.

Selection criteria
Studies were selected if they met the following criteria: randomised controlled trials of
conscious sedation comparing two or more drugs/techniques/placebo undertaken by the dentist
or one of the dental team in children up to 16 years of age. Cross-over trials were excluded.

Data collection and analysis
Two review authors independently extracted, in duplicate, information regarding methods,
participants, interventions, outcome measures and results. Trials were assessed for risk of bias.
Cochrane statistical guidelines were followed.

Main results
We included 50 studies with a total of 3704 participants. Forty studies (81%) were at high risk
of bias, nine (18%) were at unclear risk of bias, with just one assessed as at low risk of bias.
There were 34 different sedatives used with or without inhalational nitrous oxide. Dosages, mode
of administration and time of administration varied widely. Studies were grouped into placebo-
controlled, dosage and head-to-head comparisons. Meta-analysis of the available data for the
primary outcome (behaviour) was possible for studies investigating oral midazolam versus placebo
only. There is moderate-certainty evidence from six small clinically heterogeneous studies at high
or unclear risk of bias, that the use of oral midazolam in doses between 0.25 mg/kg to 1 mg/kg is
associated with more co-operative behaviour compared to placebo; standardized mean difference
(SMD) favoured midazolam (SMD 1.96, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.59 to 2.33, P < 0.0001,
I² = 90%; 6 studies; 202 participants). It was not possible to draw conclusions regarding the
secondary outcomes due to inconsistent or inadequate reporting or both.

Authors' conclusions
There is some moderate-certainty evidence that oral midazolam is an effective sedative agent for
children undergoing dental treatment. There is a need for further well-designed and well-reported
clinical trials to evaluate other potential sedation agents. It is suggested that future trials evaluate
experimental regimens in comparison with oral midazolam or inhaled nitrous oxide.

PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY
Fear of the dentist may be expressed as unco-operative behaviour in children requiring dental
treatment. Behaviour management problems can result in a child's tooth decay going untreated.
While behavioural techniques play an important role in managing children, some children still find
it difficult to co-operate and may require sedation. This review examined drugs to sedate a child
whilst keeping them conscious. 50 RCTs (3704 participants) were included; 34 different sedatives
were used, often with inhalational nitrous oxide. Because the studies were so different, a meta-
analysis was only possible for oral midazolam versus placebo. Oral midazolam made patients more
co-operative for dental treatment than placebo. Where reported, adverse effects were few and minor.
There is some moderate-certainty evidence that midazolam administered in a drink of juice is effective.
