Title: Injectable platelet rich fibrin (i-PRF) versus platelet rich fibrin (PRF) both mixed with beta-tri calcium phosphate in bone regeneration using metacarpal bone defect in goats: micro CT comparative study

Authors: Assiri M, Almoallim H, Alhindi M, Alkindi M, Alshihri S, Wahass T
Journal: The Saudi dental journal, 2026-01-22
PMID: 41566115
PMCID: PMC12824068
DOI: 10.1007/s44445-025-00112-0
Source: PubMed Central full text via PubMed MCP get_full_text_article

Abstract:
The aim of this research is to compare the regenerative capability and the bone regeneration rates of i-PRF mixed with β-TCP vs. PRF mixed with β-TCP when used for GBR within critical size defects created in metacarpal bone in a goat model, using (micro-CT) analysis. Eighteen male Najdi strain goats with a mean body weight of 30 ± 2 kg and a mean age of 8 ± 1.5 months were selected. Under a full-sterilized environment, all animals underwent the same surgical procedure in the left metacarpal bone. Four critical size defects were created in the lateral aspect of the left metacarpal bone as following: Group I (Negative control group): The 1st proximal critical size defect was allowed to heal spontaneously. Group II (Beta-Tri-calcium phosphate - β-TCP): The 2nd following critical size defect was treated with β-TCP. Group III (β-TCP + PRF group): The 3rd following critical size defect was treated with β-TCP mixed with PRF. Group IV (β-TCP + i-PRF group): The 4th following critical size defect was treated with β-TCP mixed with i-PRF. Under general anesthesia and veterinary supervision, the four (monocortical) critical size defects were created on the left metacarpal bone using bone trephine bur with an outer diameter of 6.1 mm and inner diameter of 5.25 mm. The critical size defects were treated according to the groups mentioned above. The eighteen goats were allocated to three sacrifice time points (2, 5, and 8 weeks; n=6 per time point). Four defects per goat were analyzed at each time point using micro-CT scan. A quantitative assessment of new bone formation (Bone Volume for Newly Formed Bone) (BV-NFB), a qualitative assessment for mineral density (Bone Mineral Density for Newly Formed Bone) (BMD-NFB), β-TCP Volume (TCPV), β-TCP Mineral Density (TCPMD), Trabecular Thickness (Tb-Th), Trabecular Separation (Tb-Sp) and Trabecular Number (Tb-No.) assessments were performed at the 8th week scan cycle. The mean values of BV-NFB were 39.455 mm3, 58.995 mm3, 62.665 mm3 and 80.083 mm3 by the 8th week for group I, II, III and IV respectively. Along with the mean values of BMD-NFB were 0.425 g/mm3, 0.799 g/mm3, 0.802 g/mm3 and 0.822 g/mm3 respectively. By the 8th week, the mean values of the remaining TCPV were 24.972 mm3, 22.013 mm3 and 15.319 mm3 for groups II, III and IV respectively, and the mean values of TCPMD were 0.734 g/mm3, 0.725 g/mm3 and 0.720 g/mm3 respectively. The means of NFBV, NFBMD, (Tb-Th), (Tb-Sp) and (Tb-No.) in β-TCP + i-PRF group were significantly higher than the other groups during the 2nd, 5th and 8th week. In our study, the combination of β-TCP particles and i-PRF can promote regenerative bone healing in comparison to β-TCP alone or β-TCP with PRF within a critical size defect in metacarpal bone of goats. The Micro-CT results revealed that a mixture of β-TCP particles and i-PRF show great difference in means of quantity (BV-NFB) and quality (BMD-NFB) within a critical size defect in metacarpal bone of goats.

Full Text:

Introduction

The bone is the fundamental unit of the skeletal system that provides a framework to the body, protects the vital organs, supports mechanical movement and maintains iron homeostasis (Li et al.; LoMauro et al.; Nakamura-Ishizu et al.). Amongst animal tissue, bones have an inherent capability to regenerate in response to injury. The bones regenerate during skeletal development and continuously remodel. This regeneration continues throughout the life as part of the body's repair process (Einhorn; Ramachandran). Literature has revealed that the bone regeneration process is comprised of a well-orchestrated series of biological events of bone induction and conduction. It involves a number of cell types as well as intracellular and extracellular molecular signaling pathways in an effort to optimize skeletal repair and restore skeletal function (Cho et al.; Einhorn).

Tri-Calcium Phosphates (TCPs) have been commonly used in bone regeneration because of their excellent biocompatibility, bio-resorptive ability and osteoconductive effect. Beta-Tricalcium Phosphate (β-TCP) and similar synthetic bone substitutes have various advantages, including an ease in availability, no risk of infectious disease transmissions and no need for a second surgical intervention within 6-12 months because it completely resorbs and is replaced by newly formed bone (Damlar et al.). In modern dentistry, a number of new techniques have been introduced to speed up the regeneration process of either hard or soft tissues (Bowler and Dym; Miron and Zhang; Padial-Molina et al.; Sanz-Sánchez et al.). The main emphasis has been given to the use of biologics as key mediators of tissue regeneration. Platelet-Derived Growth Factors (PDGF) have been proved very effective, nevertheless, there are some disadvantages such as high supra-physiological doses as well as high costs (Anusaksathien and Giannobile; Carreira et al.; Rocque et al.). Despite disadvantages, using these growth factors has shown significant impact on accelerating the rate of tissue formation across a wide variety of clinical procedures in both medical and dental fields (Kaigler et al.).

Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is an autologous concentration of growth factors, which is derived from a patient's whole blood centrifuged to reach super-natural concentrations (Del Corso et al.; Simonpieri et al.). The use of PRP has been utilized by both oral surgeons and periodontists alike demonstrating advantages associated with its use for a variety of extensive dental regenerative procedures (Marx,; Panda et al.; Pradeep et al.). Furthermore, reports have demonstrated that PRP may also be successfully combined with various biomaterials including collagen membranes and bone grafting materials (Camargo et al.; Döri et al.; Ozdemir and Okte; Yassibag-Berkman et al.; Yilmaz et al.). One of the reported drawbacks of PRP is that it contains anticoagulants, which is an event that interferes with the natural healing process despite containing a number of growth factors implicated in tissue repair (Del Corso et al.; Simonpieri et al.). Following numerous research utilizing PRP, further investigation found that a platelet concentrate made from whole blood without the use of coagulants could also be further utilized to improve wound healing (Choukroun et al.; Dohan et al.). This protocol has been termed platelet-rich fibrin (PRF), also more recently referred to as leukocyte-PRF (LPRF) and involves the use of a fibrin clot which may be utilized as a membrane containing autologous growth factors hypothesized to slowly release growth factors to the surrounding environment during wound healing (Lekovic et al.; Pradeep et al.). Most of the studies conclude that PRP releases the majority of its growth factors at an early time period, whereas Platelet Rich Fibrin (PRF) induces more gradual and sustained release of growth factors (Foster et al.).

An Injectable PRF (i-PRF) is a new autogenous bioactive agent alternative to the platelet aggregate used in medicine as well as dentistry. It is a liquid formulation of (PRF) found in the top layer of centrifugation tubes without the addition of anticoagulants or additives. It is derived by drawing blood rapidly in a specific centrifugation tube at a very low speed of 700 rpm for a 3-min period (Miron and Zhang). Researchers have demonstrated the ability of i-PRF to release higher concentrations of various growth factors and induced higher fibroblast migration and expression of PDGF, TGF-β, and collagen1 (Miron and Zhang). Moreover, it has been suggested that the mixing of bone graft material with i-PRF leads to delivery of growth factors inside the wound which helps the migration of osteopromotor cells and attracts circulating stem cells to the wound (Miron and Zhang; Mourão et al.).

Although several human clinical studies have evaluated PRF with β-TCP in intra-bony defects, an animal model remains indispensable for controlled, standardized critical-size defect creation and high-resolution bone regeneration analysis, which are practically difficult in humans. Therefore, the aim of this research is to compare the regenerative capability and the bone regeneration rates of i-PRF mixed with β-TCP vs. PRF mixed with β-TCP when used for GBR within critical size defects created in metacarpal bone in a goat model, using (micro-CT) analysis.

Materials and methods

The present study was approved by King Saud University Institutional Review Board (KSU-IRB) NO. 2/3/27685. The surgical procedures and the peri-operative animal care protocols were performed according to the NIH-guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals (Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 8th edition).

Animal groups

Eighteen male Najdi strain goats with a mean body weight of 30 ± 2 kg and a mean age of 8 ± 1.5 months were selected, all the animals were housed under veterinary supervision throughout the study period. All goats were vaccinated for common illnesses and allowed to acclimatize to the laboratory environment for 5 days.

Study design

Seventy two critical size defects were allocated among all 18 goats, each one contains 4 critical size defects as 4 groups in the left metacarpal bone of all goats, from proximal to distal and this order is standardized to all animals.

Negative control group: In the 1st proximal critical size defect in each left metacarpal bone was allowed to heal spontaneously.

β-TCP group: In the 2nd following critical size defect in each left metacarpal bone, was treated with β-TCP (IngeniOs β-TCP Bioactive, Zimmer dental, USA, Synthetic Bone Particles 0.25-1 mm (250-1000 μm) soaked in normal saline and placed inside the defect.

(β-TCP + PRF) group: In the 3rd following critical size defect in each left metacarpal bone was treated with β-TCP mixed with PRF.

(β-TCP + i-PRF) group: In the 4th following critical size defect in each left metacarpal bone was treated with β-TCP mixed with i-PRF.

All animals were divided into three groups according to the timing of sacrifice: 1st group sacrificed at 2 weeks, 2nd group at 5 weeks, 3rd group at 8 weeks. The time intervals of 2, 5, and 8 weeks were selected to represent early (inflammatory and osteoid formation), intermediate (matrix maturation), and late (mineralization/remodeling) phases of bone healing in goats (Rupprecht et al.).

Surgical protocol

The goats were assessed preoperatively upon arrival to the animal housing facility and immediately before surgery. The following parameters were evaluated: physical status, vital signs, metacarpal bone size measurement, and walking ability. The same operating team carried out all surgical procedures under general anesthesia. The goats were anaesthetized by intramuscular injection of xylazine (5 mg/kg), acepromazine (1.5 mg/kg) and ketamine (20 mg/kg). The goats were administered antibiotics procaine penicillin (20,000 units/kg, IM) and gentamicin (6.6 mg/kg IV) at the start of surgery and 24 h postoperatively and analgesic paracetamol (10 mg/kg IV every 8 h) for 3 days. After palpation of the proximal and distal ends of the left metacarpal bone and marking a line connecting the two ends, an eight cm longitudinal skin incision was made and bone was exposed, then four surgical bony critical size defects were created in the lateral side of each left metacarpal bone using a bone trephine bur with an outer diameter of 6.1 mm and inner diameter of 5.25 mm and length of 8 mm with a 10 mm distance between each defect. Four mini screws (2.0 mm diameter, 5 mm length) were inserted 7 mm inferior to each critical size defect for orientation during Micro-CT analysis in detecting the Region Of Interest (ROI) after sacrifice.

The β-TCP particles mixed with normal saline. PRF was prepared following the protocol described by Dohan et al. 2006; i-PRF was prepared following the protocol described by Mourão et al. After placement of each material in each corresponding defect, all critical size defects were covered by resorbable collagen membrane (Bio-Gide, Geistlich Pharma AG, Switzerland) and the wounds were closed in layers. Post-operative parameters evaluated: vital signs, physical status, walking ability, nutrition, and surgical sites for wound dehiscence, foreign body reactions, hemorrhage, and infection (daily for 1st week and every 2 days for two weeks).

Sacrifice and assessment

After 2 weeks, 6 goats were selected randomly and sacrificed. Following the 5th week, additional 6 goats were sacrificed. Finally, in the 8th week, the remaining 6 goats were sacrificed. The left metacarpal bones were osteotomized 20 mm proximal and distal to the ROI and fixed in 10% neutral formalin solution for 1 week. All samples were scanned with high-energy Micro-CT (SkyScan 1173, Kontich, Belgium) using energy of 100 kV, intensity 343 mA, resolution 12.39 mm pixels, aluminum filter (1 mm). Three-dimensional reconstruction was performed with N Recon Software (Bruker SkyScan). Parameters acquired: bone volume (BV, mm3) and bone mineral density (BMD, mg/cm3) of mineralized tissue within ROI, plus Newly formed Bone Trabecular thickness (Tb-Th, mm), Trabecular separation (Tb-Sp, mm), Trabecular number (Tb-No., mm-1).

Statistical analysis

Data analyzed via SPSS IBM v25.0, significance level 0.05. Shapiro-Wilk and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for normality (satisfied, p>0.05). Levene test for homogeneity of variance (satisfied). Two-way ANOVA to test factor effects and interactions; one-way ANOVA for pairwise comparisons; Tukey (or Games-Howell if variance unequal) post-hoc tests.

Results

BV-NFB: at 2nd, 5th, 8th week, β-TCP + i-PRF group demonstrated the highest values among all groups (p=0.000); negative control group was lowest. No substantial difference between β-TCP and β-TCP + PRF groups.

BMD-NFB: at 2nd and 5th week, β-TCP + i-PRF group demonstrated the highest values, negative control the lowest; no significant difference between β-TCP and β-TCP + PRF groups. At 8th week, no significant difference found between β-TCP + i-PRF, β-TCP + PRF, and β-TCP groups.

TCPV (residual graft volume): at 2nd week, β-TCP group had the highest value, significantly different from β-TCP + i-PRF group; no difference between β-TCP + PRF and β-TCP + i-PRF, and no significant difference between β-TCP and β-TCP + PRF. At 5th week, β-TCP group was most significant among others; no significant difference between β-TCP + PRF and β-TCP + i-PRF. At 8th week, β-TCP + i-PRF group was significantly the lowest (i.e., fastest resorption), while β-TCP and β-TCP + PRF showed no significant difference. TCPMD showed no significant difference among all groups at any time point.

Tb-Th was significantly higher in both β-TCP + PRF and β-TCP + i-PRF groups than the other groups, with β-TCP + i-PRF significantly higher than β-TCP + PRF at 2nd, 5th, and 8th week. Tb-Sp was significantly highest in the negative control group and lowest in β-TCP + i-PRF at all time points. Tb-No was significantly higher in β-TCP + i-PRF vs. β-TCP + PRF at 2nd and 8th week (no significant difference at 5th week).

By 8th week: mean BV-NFB was 39.455 mm3 (negative control), 58.995 mm3 (β-TCP), 62.665 mm3 (β-TCP+PRF), 80.083 mm3 (β-TCP+i-PRF). Mean BMD-NFB was 0.425, 0.799, 0.802, 0.822 g/mm3 respectively. Mean remaining TCPV was 24.972, 22.013, 15.319 mm3 for β-TCP, β-TCP+PRF, β-TCP+i-PRF respectively. Mean TCPMD was 0.734, 0.725, 0.720 g/mm3 respectively.

Overall the β-TCP + i-PRF group showed the greatest similarity to normal bone regarding BV-NFB, BMD-NFB, Tb-Th, Tb-Sp, Tb-No at 8th week, followed by β-TCP + PRF, β-TCP, and negative control groups respectively.

Discussion

The goat model was chosen because goat bone has metabolic and remodeling rates comparable to human bone and allows implantation of large critical-size defects. Micro-CT is a validated, non-destructive method correlated with histomorphometry for assessing bone architecture. NFB volumes increased steadily from 2 to 8 weeks in all groups; the negative control showed minimal but present new bone formation reflecting natural healing capacity. Among TCP groups, β-TCP + i-PRF showed the highest BV-NFB at 8 weeks, likely reflecting synergy between i-PRF's fibrin network (sustained release of PDGF, TGF-β, other cytokines, enhanced osteoprogenitor recruitment) and the graft's osteoconductive scaffold. β-TCP + i-PRF also showed the lowest residual TCP volume (fastest resorption) concurrent with highest BV-NFB/BMD-NFB, supporting a model where i-PRF promotes a more bioactive milieu accelerating scaffold turnover and replacement by well-mineralized trabecular bone. This is consistent with prior PRF/PRP and i-PRF preclinical/clinical literature, and extends it by quantitatively showing superior micro-architectural outcomes (Tb-Th↑, Tb-Sp↓, Tb-No↑) in a large-animal, critical-size defect model. Clinically, this may translate to earlier readiness for functional loading in GBR procedures.

Limitation: histologic examination was not performed in this study; this is acknowledged as a limitation, and future studies combining micro-CT with histomorphometric analysis are recommended to validate microstructural/cellular findings.

Conclusion

The combination of β-TCP particles and i-PRF can promote regenerative bone healing compared to β-TCP alone or β-TCP with PRF within a critical size defect in metacarpal bone of goats. Micro-CT results revealed that a mixture of β-TCP particles and i-PRF shows a marked difference in means of quantity (BV-NFB) and quality (BMD-NFB) within a critical size defect in metacarpal bone of goats.
