Title: Is Sjogren's syndrome a risk factor/contraindication for dental implants? An umbrella review.

Authors: Ana Waleska Pessoa Barros, Pedro Henrique da Hora Sales, Alessandra de Albuquerque Tavares Carvalho, Preeyan Patel, Stephen Porter, Jair Carneiro Leão

Journal: Special Care in Dentistry (Spec Care Dentist). 2021;41(4):453-462.

PMID: 33987854
DOI: 10.1111/scd.12591

Publication date: 2021-05-13

Article types: Journal Article; Systematic Review
Keywords: Sjogren's syndrome; dental implantation; oral rehabilitation; osseointegration
MeSH terms: Contraindications; Dental Implants; Humans; Risk Factors; Sjogren's Syndrome; Systematic Reviews as Topic

ABSTRACT (source: PubMed, via NCBI PubMed MCP get_article_metadata; full text not retrieved — abstract only, article is behind Wiley paywall, no PMC ID available):

There have been concerns that longstanding oral dryness secondary to Sjogren's syndrome may increase the risk of failure of dental implants.

The aim of the present study was to determine the level of methodological quality of systematic reviews that evaluated the effectiveness of dental implants in patients diagnosed with Sjogren's syndrome.

Databases of PubMed/Medline, LILACS, Science Direct and Dare Cochrane to October 2020 were evaluated. A total of 833 articles were initially identified but following use of appropriate inclusion and exclusion criteria 4 papers were identified for detailed analysis. An eventual study sample comprised 722 implants placed in 189 patients with a 95.22% success rate, the minimum follow-up time was 45.2 ± 23.8 months and the maximum 125.5 months. The studies were assessed for their methodological quality by the AMSTAR 2 tool, in which 3 had critically low quality and one low quality.

Oral rehabilitation with dental implants in patients with Sjogren's syndrome seems to have a high success rate; however, the low quality of relevant reports highlights the need for primary and secondary studies with better methodological design in order to reduce bias and provide reassurance for this treatment option.
