Title: In vitro proinflammatory gene expression changes in human whole blood after contact with plasma-treated implant surfaces

Authors: Becker M, Quabius ES, Kewitz T, Hansen L, Becker G, Kern M, Kersten H, Harder S

Journal: Journal of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery. 2019 Aug;47(8):1255-1261.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2019.05.004
PMID: 31151775
Source: PubMed abstract (full text not retrieved — no PMC full text available for this PMID; paywalled Elsevier journal)

Abstract:

The aim of this in vitro study was to identify changes in gene expression of proinflammatory cytokines in human whole blood after contact with titanium implant surfaces after plasma treatment.

Grade 4 titanium dental implants were conditioned with low-pressure plasma (LPP) and atmospheric-pressure plasma (APP) and submerged in human whole blood in vitro. Unconditioned implants and blood samples without implants served as control and negative control groups, respectively. Sampling was performed at 1, 8, and 24 h. Changes in mRNA expression levels of interleukin 1-beta (IL1-beta) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) were assessed using RT-qPCR.

In the control group, significant increases in IL1-beta and TNF-alpha expression were observed. Significant decreases in the expression of IL1-beta and TNF-alpha were identified in blood with implants after plasma treatment.

Differences in gene expression of proinflammatory cytokines after incubation of plasma-conditioned titanium implants can be assessed using human whole blood. The results of the present study indicate that plasma treatment (APP and LPP) of titanium dental implants leads to downregulation of proinflammatory cytokine gene expression, which might be beneficial in early osseointegration.

Keywords: Atmospheric-pressure plasma; Dental implants; Gene expression analysis; Human whole blood; Low-pressure plasma; Proinflammatory cytokines

MeSH terms: Cytokines; Dental Implants; Gene Expression; Humans; Osseointegration; Surface Properties; Titanium

Article type: Journal Article
Language: eng
Citation: Volume 47, Issue 8, Pages 1255-1261
