SOURCE: PubMed structured abstract (abstract-only; full text not retrieved — no PMC record)
PMID: 26077930 | DOI: 10.1111/clr.12630
Clin Oral Implants Res. 2015;26 Suppl 11:57-63.  (EAO consensus conference)

EAO consensus conference: economic evaluation of implant-supported prostheses.
Beikler T, Flemmig TF.

OBJECTIVES: There are various alternatives for the management of oral conditions that may lead to or
already have led to partial or full edentulism. Economic evaluations measure the efficiency of
alternative healthcare interventions and provide useful information for decision-making and the
allocation of scarce resources.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Current English literature dealing with "cost-effectiveness" of dental implant
therapy versus different alternative treatment modalities (complete and fixed partial dentures, root
canal treatment, periodontal treatment) included in this narrative review. Due to high heterogeneity
within the literature, a meta-analysis could NOT be conducted.
RESULTS:
- Central incisors with irreversible pulpitis and coronal lesions: root canal treatment was the most
  cost-effective INITIAL treatment option.
- When initial root canal treatment failed: orthograde retreatment was most cost-effective.
- When root canal retreatment failed: extraction and replacement with single implant-supported crowns
  were MORE cost-effective compared to fixed or removable partial dentures.
- Periodontitis in molars with Class I furcation invasion: non-surgical periodontal therapy was more
  effective and cost less than implant-supported single crowns.
- Replacement of single missing teeth: two evaluations indicated implant-supported single crowns
  provided better outcomes (greater quality-adjusted tooth years or survival rates) at LOWER costs
  compared to fixed partial prostheses. Another economic evaluation found implant-supported crowns
  cost MORE but provided greater survival rates compared to fixed partial dentures.
- Restoration of edentulous mandibles: two evaluations indicated overdentures retained by two or four
  implants improved oral health-related quality of life outcomes, but cost more than complete dentures.
CONCLUSIONS: To better assess the efficiency of implant-supported prostheses in various clinical
conditions, more economic evaluations are needed that follow well-established methodologies in health
economics.
