Title: Efficacy of Low-Level Laser Therapy in Management of Temporomandibular Joint Pain: A Double Blind and Placebo Controlled Trial

Authors: Desai Ajay Premanand, Roy S K, Semi Ravinder Singh, Balasundaram T
Journal: Journal of Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery
Published: 2021-05-25
PMID: 36274894
PMCID: PMC9474957
DOI: 10.1007/s12663-021-01591-4
Source: PubMed Central (get_full_text_article returned empty body; abstract retrieved via PubMed metadata)

NOTE: PMC full text body was empty for this record at time of ingest (Springer/AOMSI journal — known
partial-PMC-conversion behavior). Only the structured abstract below was retrievable through the
PubMed MCP. full_text: false in the source/wiki frontmatter reflects this.

--- ABSTRACT ---

Background

Stomatognathic system is an interaction of the muscles of mastication, dentition, neural component,
and temporomandibular joint. Any dysfunction in this system may lead to temporomandibular disorders
(TMDs). Various non-surgical modalities have been employed for treating TMDs.

Aim and objectives

The aim of the study was to objectively evaluate the effects of low-level laser therapy (LLLT) in
treatment of patients with TMDs.

Materials and Methods

Sixty individuals diagnosed with TMDs were divided randomly into two groups (Group I—placebo and
Group II -LLLT). A series of 20 sessions of LLLT applied both in closed mouth and maximum mouth
opening position were given over a period of 08 weeks. Assessment was done in terms of improvement
in mouth opening, pain, clicking, and deviation of mandible. The data collected were analyzed
statistically.

Results

The results showed improvement in the pain reduction, improvement in the maximum mouth opening,
reduction in deviation, and clicking in both groups but better treatment outcome in the low-level
laser group.

Conclusion

Though conservative measures improved the symptoms in TMD but LLLT has shown better results in
comparison with the placebo group. Being non-surgical can be employed in combination with other
modes for effectively treating such disorders.

Keywords: Pain, Dysfunction, Temporomandibular joint disorders (TMDs), Low-level laser therapy (LLLT).
