[PUBMED ABSTRACT ONLY — no PMC copy, no PDF. Retrieved via E-utilities efetch on 2026-08-22.]
Source: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/42100841/
DOI: 10.3290/j.qi.b7003245
---
1. Quintessence Int. 2026 Jun 22;57(6):498-511. doi: 10.3290/j.qi.b7003245.

ARP with a crosslinked xenograft in an open healing mode: clinical and 
microscopic characteristics of a case series.

Friedmann A, Tendeng G, Bilhan H, Diehl D, Goetz W.

OBJECTIVE: This case series aims to report clinical, radiographic, and 
microscopic outcomes of replacing extracted teeth with a crosslinked 
collagen/hydroxyapatite-enhanced porcine sponge for alveolar ridge preservation. 
Reporting includes the 12-month survival rate of implants placed after the 
alveolar ridge preservation period was completed.
METHOD AND MATERIALS: Following gentle tooth extraction and degranulation of the 
socket, tactile examination revealed the morphologic configuration of remaining 
bone. Sockets presenting with ≥ 50% of residual buccal bone were included, and 
received - regardless of the present soft tissue contour - treatment with 
sugar-crosslinked collagen/hydroxyapatite-enhanced (SCLC/HA) sponge. The sponge 
was inserted into the socket, positioning it at the same height as the 
soft-tissue margins of the orifice. No soft tissue closure was intended, and a 
cross-suture stabilized the graft for the initial 7 days of healing. After 
alveolar ridge preservation was considered complete, a reentry surgery followed 
for implant placement in sites initially planned for implant treatment. Eleven 
patients agreed to donate 12 tissue samples obtained at implant placement to 
assess tissue assembly and to understand the remodeling process of the graft. 
Implants were placed if the site appeared suitable, and different loading 
protocols were initiated. Samples were processed in decalcified mode. 
Microscopic analysis used hematoxylin-eosin and Azan stain, von Willebrand 
factor (vWF) expression, alveolar ridge preservation, RUNX2, ED-1, periostin, 
osteopontin and osteocalcin; activity was evaluated by means of 
immunohistochemistry, while TRAP (tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase)-positive 
cells were histochemically labeled. One year after implant loading the survival 
of the implants placed after alveolar ridge preservation was calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 49 patients with 62 treated sites were included. From 62 
sites, 54 were planned to receive an implant following a period of alveolar 
ridge preservation healing. This period varied among patients from 3.5 months to 
over 12 months, and the outcome was separated into early- and late-reentry 
groups. Clinically, all sites healed without complications, consistently showing 
a new layer of soft tissue cover at the former orifice 3 to 4 weeks after tooth 
extraction. Microscopic analysis supported this time-based separation, as the 
specimens showed varying amounts of residual graft material per group. The soft 
tissue showed well-keratinized epithelium microscopically, with a layer of newly 
arranged lamina propria beneath the rete pegs. The duration of the alveolar 
ridge preservation healing period was identified as a factor in whether the 
xenograft underwent incomplete or complete remodeling. Of the 54 
implant-receiving sites, 39 showed sufficient orofacial width and vertical 
dimension for implant placement without additional intervention. Additionally, 
12 sites required either vertical extension of subantral bone or concomitant 
lateral guided bone regeneration at implant placement. In three sites, another 
staged augmentation was required. The 1-year survival rate after implant loading 
was 98.2%, as one of the 54 inserted implants experienced early loss due to 
disintegration under immediate temporalization conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the limitations of a case series, it can be concluded that 
the alveolar ridge preservation procedure using the SCLC/HA sponge results in 
predictable secondary healing and well-maintained ridge dimensions suitable for 
implant placement and function. Soft tissue healing was consistent across all 
cases and sites, with only a few requiring additional staged augmentation. 
Microscopic analysis revealed complete remodeling of the xenograft in sites with 
healing period lasting > 6 months.

DOI: 10.3290/j.qi.b7003245
PMID: 42100841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]