Title: Influence of margin location and luting material on the amount of undetected cement excess on CAD/CAM implant abutments and cement-retained zirconia crowns: an in-vitro study
Authors: Peter Gehrke, Konstantin Bleuel, Carsten Fischer, Robert Sader
Journal: BMC Oral Health. 2019;19(1):111
PMID: 31200680
PMCID: PMC6567410
DOI: 10.1186/s12903-019-0809-2
Source: PubMed Central (PMC) full text, retrieved via PubMed MCP

Abstract

Background

The flexibility in designing the submucosal part of CAD/CAM customized implant abutments and the individual positioning of its shoulder line has been suggested to reduce the risk of leaving undetected cement residues, thus preventing adverse effects on peri-implant tissues. A high correlation between excess cement left in the soft tissues and the occurrence of increased biofilm accumulation with sulcular bleeding and/ or suppuration has been reported. This in turn may cause peri-implant inflammation and peri-implant marginal bone loss. The aim of this study was to assess the frequency of cement remnants after the luting of zirconia crowns on CAD/CAM custom molar abutments with different margin levels and to evaluate the impact of the luting material.

Material and methods

A total of 20 titanium molar CAD/CAM implant abutments (BEGO Medical GmbH) with internal taper connection/ internal hex anti-rotation protection, and a convex emergence profile with different margin positions (0, 1, 2 and 3 mm below the mucosa), were virtually designed (Implant Studio, 3Shape) and manufactured. A master cast was scanned, duplicated by a 3D printer and individual gingival masks were produced to simulate peri-implant soft tissues. 20 corresponding zirconia crowns were designed (Cerec 3D, Dentsply Sirona), produced and cemented to the abutments with two different luting materials; a zinc oxide non-eugenol cement (Temp Bond NE) or a methacrylate cement (Panavia V5). To ensure retrievability of the crown/abutment connection, occlusal openings providing access to the abutment screws were designed. Excess cement was thoroughly removed and the crown/abutment units were unscrewed to evaluate the occurrence of cement residues. All the quadrants of each specimen were evaluated for calculation of the ratio between the cement remnant area and the total specimen area using Adobe Photoshop. Spearman analysis was performed to detect correlations between different variables. A two-sided t-test, ANOVA, Mann-Whitney, and Kruskal-Wallis tests were applied to detect differences between the groups.

Results

Cement remnants were found in every depth of the crown abutment complex and in almost every area investigated. The amount of cement residues increased as the crown-abutment margin was located more submucosally. Lingual areas were more prone to cement remnants than other surface areas (p = 0.0291). Excess cement was not only found at the margins of the crown-abutment complex, but also underneath (basal) the abutment itself, where cleaning was impossible. No statistical difference in the effect of zinc oxide non-eugenol- and methacrylate cement on the frequency of excess material at the lateral abutment surfaces could be demonstrated in vitro. The proportion of basal abutment aspects covered with cement residues was, however, significantly smaller in Panavia V5 samples with an average of 4.9 +/- 3.7% compared to Temp Bond samples with an average of 8.6 +/- 5.5%.

Conclusions

Given the results obtained in the present investigation the margin of CAD/CAM molar abutments should be located as coronally as possible to minimize the amount of cement remnants. If an epigingival or supragingival margin location is not feasible due to esthetic concerns, it cannot be recommended to place the margin of molar CAD/CAM abutments deeper than 1.5 mm in the proximal and oral regions.

Full Text

Background

An abutment serves as the extension of a dental implant into the oral cavity and thus as basis for the subsequent restoration. Its biological function is to shape and support the peri-implant soft tissues while at the same time functioning as a sufficient barrier for bacterial colonization. Implant abutments are selected according to the bone level, mucosal thickness, angulation, shape and size of the reconstruction. The shoulder margin can be set both sub- and supra-mucosal, depending on soft-tissue architecture and esthetic requirements. Implants can be restored with either screw-retained or cement-retained restorations. The latter is a commonly utilized prosthetic technique since it allows for a tolerance with respect to the implant axis and position and it is familiar to the majority of practitioners. Cemented restorations, however, have a number of disadvantages, including the challenge of completely removing cement remnants around the restoration. As undetected cement excess of fixed implant-supported restorations has been associated with clinical and radiographic signs of peri-implant inflammation, there is an essential need to reduce this risk.

Agar et al. examined the removal of excess cement around implant crowns with stock abutment margins placed at various levels below an artificial mucosal margin. Even after careful removal attempts, cement remnants could always be detected, independent of the examiner's experience or instruments used. Additional aspects, such as the vertical position of the crown-abutment interface or the type of luting material appeared to be influential. These findings are supported by in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrating that the depth of the crown-abutment interface of stock abutments negatively influences the practitioner's ability to remove cement excess. Another weakness of cement-retained restorations is the difficulty or impossibility of removing the restoration in case of complications, without damaging or destroying it. In contrast, the major benefit of screw-retained reconstructions is their retrievability.

While the majority of available data refers to prefabricated stock abutments, little is known about the incidence of undetected cement residues of computer-aided designed and manufactured (CAD/CAM) custom abutments in the molar region. The flexibility in designing the submucosal part of custom abutments and the individual positioning of its shoulder line has been suggested to reduce the risk of leaving undetected cement residues, thus preventing adverse effects on peri-implant tissues. However, so far there is little data available to support this hypothesis.

Consequently, the aim of the present in vitro study was to assess the frequency of cement remnants after luting of zirconia crowns on convex emergence profile molar CAD/CAM abutments with different margin levels (0, 1, 2 and 3 mm below the mucosa), and to evaluate the impact of two different luting materials.

Methods

A total of 20 titanium CAD/CAM implant abutments with a convex emergence profile and different margin positions (0, 1, 2 and 3 mm below the mucosa), were virtually designed (Implant Studio, 3Shape, Copenhagen, Denmark) and manufactured (BEGO Medical GmbH, Bremen, Germany). The master cast of a clinical case in which the left maxillary first molar had been replaced by an implant restoration served as the origin of the model. The case was restored using a regular platform two-piece implant with an internal taper connection and internal hex anti-rotation protection (BEGO Semados RSX D 4.1/L 11.5, BEGO Implant Systems GmbH & Co. KG, Bremen, Germany). The emergence profile of the peri-implant mucosa had been pre-conditioned by means of a temporary implant-supported single crown. The original master cast with the implant analog was duplicated in type IV plaster. All abutment specimens were cleansed three times in an ultrasonic bath at 30C for 5 min each.

In addition, 20 corresponding monolithic zirconia crowns (Zirlux, Henry Schein, Langen, Germany) were CAD/CAM designed and produced (Cerec 3D, Dentsply Sirona, Bensheim, Germany). The master cast with the implant analog was scanned with a 3D scanner, duplicated by a 3D printer and individual gingival masks were confectioned to simulate the peri-implant mucosal tissues. The light body polyvinyl siloxane gingival mask (Gingifast, Zermak, Marl, Germany) was replicated four times and altered for each depth of the crown-abutment distance.

Occlusal openings were designed in the zirconia crowns in order to have access to the occlusal abutment screw after cementation. Before cementation, the top of each prosthetic abutment was covered with a cotton pellet in order to protect the abutment screw. The occlusal crown openings were closed with a dual cured flexible composite Telio CS Link (Ivoclar Vivadent, Liechtenstein) to obturate the screw access and to allow for retrieval of the abutment-crown complex after cementation.

The cement was mixed according to the manufacturer's instructions. A thin uniform layer was applied to all internal surfaces of the crowns using the mixing tips of the cartridges and seated onto the abutment with constant finger pressure. The exact amount of cement was not quantified, as the cementation protocol tried to imitate a real clinical scenario. The cementation process was performed by one experienced clinician (PG).

In the first trial, a zinc oxide non-eugenol cement (Temp Bond NE, Kerr Dental, Germany) was used for luting the crowns. After the cleaning and evaluation process, the crown was separated from the abutment and all parts were thoroughly cleaned with an acrylic scaler and 100-mum aluminum oxide particle abrasion, then cleansed three times in an ultrasonic bath. In the second trial, a methacrylate cement (Panavia V5, Kuraray, Japan) was used for the cementation. A second investigator (KB) not involved in the cementing process attempted to remove any cement residues using a steel scaler and super-floss until convinced it had been completely cleaned. Constant vertical pressure on the crown was kept until the cement had fully set. Subsequently, the occlusal closing materials were removed, the abutment screw was unscrewed and the superstructure complex was dismounted for assessment.

A computerized planimetric method of cement assessment described by Linkevicius et al. was utilized. All measurements were obtained by a single calibrated examiner (CF). Calibration was tested by double analysis of standardized digital photographs from 10 CAD/CAM abutments, with a one-week interval; agreement coefficient 0.96, mean difference 0.03 +/- 0.92 (values >=0.75 considered excellent). Digital photographs were taken from all four quadrants (mesial, buccal, distal and lingual) using a 100 mm macro objective lens (Canon EOS D80). Images were analyzed using Adobe Photoshop: the circumference of the total crown-abutment surface was marked using the lasso tool and pixel count recorded from the histogram option; the same procedure was applied to the area covered with cement remnants. The ratio between cement-covered area and total surface area was calculated. Each specimen had four measurements (mesial/buccal/distal/lingual), yielding a sample size of 20 per group.

Statistical analyses used STATISTICA and BiAS. Frequency distributions characterized categorical variables. Mann-Whitney-U-Test and Kruskal-Wallis H-Test compared independent groups for continuous variables. Significance was set at p < 0.05.

Results

Cement remnants were found in almost every abutment area investigated. The amount of remnants varied according to the depth of the crown-abutment margin. Excess cement was found not only at the margins of the crown-abutment complex but also underneath (basal) the molar abutment itself, where no cleaning was possible due to its prominent emergence profile.

Temp Bond NE: There was a clear tendency for undetected residues on lateral abutment surfaces to increase with margin depth from 0 to 2 mm, with a slight decrease from 2 to 3 mm. No statistical significance was found between margin depth and frequency of remnants overall (p = 0.1520). Individual surfaces: mesial p = 0.1106, distal p = 0.0581, buccal p = 0.061, lingual p = 0.1312. Basal surface excess was notable across all margin depths but not statistically significant in relation to margin depth (p = 0.336).

Panavia V5: Comparing the four margin depths, buccal (p = 0.0860), mesial (p = 0.0922), distal (p = 0.9679), and basal (p = 0.9846) surfaces showed no statistical significance. However, the lingual surface demonstrated statistical significance (p = 0.0291) at 3 mm subgingival margin depth.

Comparison of the two cement types: the proportion of basal abutment aspects covered with cement residues was significantly smaller with Panavia V5 (methacrylate), averaging 4.9 +/- 3.7%, compared to Temp Bond NE (zinc oxide non-eugenol), averaging 8.6 +/- 5.5% (p = 0.007). The difference in the mean sum of lateral abutment surfaces affected by cement residues between the two cement types was not statistically significant (p = 0.398).

Discussion

Biological properties of the interface between implant abutment and surrounding tissues are of critical importance for long-term success. Cement remnants of fixed implant-supported restorations have been associated with clinical and radiographic signs of peri-implantitis. Numerous in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated that the depth of the crown-abutment interface of stock abutments negatively influences the practitioner's ability to remove cement remnants. CAD/CAM custom abutment design with a natural emergence profile and proper spatial outline at the cervical margin has been claimed to reduce the challenges of undetected excess cement.

Unlike most previous studies (which used stock abutments), the present investigation analyzed the quantity and depth of remnants around custom CAD/CAM abutments with a convex emergence profile at different regions of a molar crown-abutment complex. Results revealed cement remnants at every depth of the crown-abutment complex and in almost every investigated area. The amount of cement left was influenced by the location of the crown-abutment margin: although no statistical significance was found between margin depth and presence of remnants, an increase in remnants was detected when the crown-abutment margin was located more submucosally. Deep crown-abutment margin positions (deeper than 1 mm below mucosa) increased the risk of residual cement. Excess cement was more difficult to remove at oral and approximal surfaces than other surface areas using scaler and super-floss. Cement remnants were found not only at the margins of the crown-abutment complex but also at the basal surface of the abutment, highlighting the need for utmost care when cementing crowns to CAD/CAM molar abutments with a prominent convex emergence profile.

Clinically, a mismatch between the digitally planned margin of a CAD/CAM-customized abutment and its intraoral position after delivery can occur, arising from impression-taking artifacts (collapse of supra-implant mucosa, scan body/impression coping geometry mismatch). Pietruski et al. found that in 20% of 257 abutments, soft tissue height reduction occurred with unfavorable abutment shoulder display, and recommended setting the abutment shoulder slightly deeper submucosally than CAD software routinely recommends to avoid soft tissue deficiency — a tension with the present study's recommendation to keep margins coronal, underscoring the case-by-case esthetic/biologic trade-off.

Limitations: in vitro nature; small sample size (though balanced with proper statistical analysis); the statistically significant lingual result for Panavia V5 (p = 0.0291) should be regarded with caution; a silicone gingival mask cannot entirely replicate the peri-implant sulcus; clinical data suggest temporary (zinc oxide non-eugenol) cements are more likely washed out by sulcus fluid than resin-based cements; the amount of cement applied was not standardized (a micro-brush or automatic pipette could reduce inter-group disparity); cement volume/weight were not assessed (2D photographic planimetry rather than SEM), which may underestimate true cement volume.

The impact of cement remnants in the development of peri-implantitis remains discussed controversially. Excess cement in subgingival areas has been described as "artificial calculus" with an irritating effect similar to calculus on periodontally involved teeth. A multicenter 3-year prospective study reported that peri-implant soft tissues reacted more favorably to screw-retained crowns compared with cement-retained restorations. A recent clinical trial comparing cemented versus screw-retained single implant-supported ceramic crowns found cemented restorations associated with more inflammatory cells and more periodontal pathogens at 6 months, despite similar radiological/clinical outcomes overall. In contrast, Blanes et al. showed peri-implant tissues around cemented restorations were not more inflamed than around screw-retained prostheses.

Cement excess is only one of several potential factors causing tissue inflammation and peri-implantitis development, which is predominantly plaque-induced. Other contributing local factors include patient compliance with supportive peri-implant maintenance, smoking, alcohol consumption, foreign body reactions to alloplastic grafting materials, varying soft/hard tissue composition, improper three-dimensional implant positioning, implant surface morphology, contamination of the inner implant connection, and laboratory workflow contamination. Canullo et al., in a cross-sectional study of 554 patients / 1507 implants, found implant width to be the second most common determinant of peri-implantitis after plaque-induced inflammation, hypothesizing bone-grafting/compression-force factors during wider-implant drilling.

Recently, a cone-in-cone Morse taper "conometric" connection (Acuris Conometric Concept, Dentsply Sirona) has been introduced as a friction-retained alternative eliminating cement or screws while allowing easy retrievability, used for hybrid acrylic-composite, monolithic lithium disilicate, and monolithic zirconia restorations in the posterior region, with favorable mid-term survival and few prosthetic complications reported.

Conclusions

Given the results obtained in the present in vitro investigation, the margin of CAD/CAM molar abutments should be located as coronally as possible to minimize the amount of cement remnants. If this ideal margin location is not feasible due to esthetic concerns, it cannot be recommended to place the margin of molar abutments deeper than 1.5 mm in the approximal and oral regions.
