Introduction

Homeostasis is a dynamic equilibrium process in which the physiological functions of each system in living organisms are maintained through self-regulation. The field of homeostatic medicine focuses on examining molecules, cells, organs, and the entire organism in a state of balance and serves as a comprehensive discipline that uses homeostasis as a basis for promoting human well-being, preventing diseases, and providing medical care. In contrast to conventional “symptomatic treatment”, homeostatic medicine emphasizes “etiological treatment”, in which disruption of homeostasis is considered the root cause of illness. In oral cavity, oral microbial homeostasis is the delicate equilibrium between the oral microbiome and the host. In addition to its role in maintaining the health and balance of an organism, the oral microbiome plays a critical role in fostering homeostasis and controlling immunity in the host. However, oral microbial homeostasis imbalance is linked to more than just oral diseases, such as dental caries and periodontitis, as it affects other organs or tissues of the body (e.g., tumors, intestine, heart, blood, brain, joints, placenta) to promote the development of systemic diseases,.

Bone is a highly mineralized organ that undergoes a continuous process of deconstruction and repair, which ensures basic physiological functions. Normally, cartilage containing chondrocytes can ossify to create normal bone tissue, and osteoblasts and osteoclasts inhibit one another to maintain bone homeostasis. However, the imbalance of bone homeostasis caused by various factors, such as trauma, infection, and age, can result in systemic bone-related diseases, which seriously affects quality of life. Therefore, the study of bone-related cell activities and regulatory processes is crucial for understanding systemic bone-related diseases.

Oral microbial homeostasis has drawn increased amounts of attention in the field of bone homeostasis in recent years. Chen et al. suggested the new term “oral osteomicrobiology” to describe the involvement of the oral microbiome in the health and disorders of alveolar bone. Researchers have recently investigated the link between oral microbial homeostasis imbalance and systemic bone-related diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), osteoarthritis (OA), osteoporosis (OP), and osteomyelitis (OM),,,. These studies suggest that changes in oral microbial homeostasis may contribute to systemic bone-related diseases, but whether such changes help predict disease severity and morbidity has yet to be explored. Although the role of oral microbiome in oral parts such as alveolar bone, jaw bone, and temporomandibular joint has been well studied, the role of oral microbiome in nonoral parts of the body such as the femur and knee joint has not been systematically reviewed.

In this review, systematic literature search was conducted in PubMed from inception through August 3, 2024, with no language limits. We identified 168 studies focused on homeostatic medicine, oral microbiome, periodontal disease and systemic bone-related diseases, including 102 basic studies, 53 related reviews, 8 observational studies, 4 case reports and 1 clinical trials. We mainly discuss the homeostatic changes in the oral microbiome in systemic bone-related diseases, summarize the main pathways through which oral microbial homeostasis imbalance affects systemic bone-related diseases and analyze the mechanisms that may lead to abnormal bone metabolism, and explore the potential diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for oral microbial homeostasis in systemic bone-related diseases. Overall, this review lays the foundation for further research on the role of oral microbiome in periodontal disease and systemic bone-related diseases, but many underlying mechanisms remain to be discovered.

Oral microbial homeostasis and its influencing factors

With more than 700 different bacterial strains, the oral microbiome is the second most complex gut microbiome. In the past, it was challenging to fully culture the diverse microbial communities found in the oral cavity. Using new genomic technologies, such as next-generation sequencing, researchers have gradually transitioned from traditional epidemiological studies of risk factors for oral diseases to new explorations of the entire oral microbiome and its complex relationships with systemic diseases in recent years. Oral microbiome sequencing revealed that postmenopausal women with the same periodontal status have different oral microbiomes. Pathogenic oral bacteria were found in patients without periodontal disease, and nonpathogenic bacteria were found in patients with severe periodontal disease. This study suggested that systemic diseases may not be caused solely by a particular bacterium in the oral cavity but rather by an imbalance in the homeostatic environment of the whole oral microbiome. Hence, comprehending the notion of oral microbial homeostasis will enhance our understanding of the oral microbiome and its connection to systemic diseases.

Microorganisms have a good and complex immune communication system that allows them to interact with one another and with their hosts during oral microbial homeostasis. To maintain oral microbial homeostasis, oral bacteria and the host may participate in protective immune responses. For instance,() can trigger Toll-like receptors (TLRs) on oral epithelial cells (OECs), causing the generation of antimicrobial peptides or cytokines to maintain oral homeostasis and health. Multi-omics studies have shown that the immunological response of oral tissues and mitochondrial metabolism may be the driving forces behind the ability of the oral microbiome to modify molecular biological processes and redesign the structure of the oral epithelial barrier to preserve oral homeostasis. However, oral bacteria can also evade or subvert host immune responses, leading to an imbalance in oral microbial homeostasis.() is a periodontal pathogenic bacterium that circumvents antimicrobial defense systems, such as the eATP/NOX2-ROS-antibacterial pathway, and controls inflammatory and antibacterial responses via the Notch1/PLA2-IIA axis in OECs. Even in cases in which the presence ofis minimal, accounting for less than 0.01 % of the entire bacterial population, it can induce microbial homeostasis imbalance by affecting the function of host complement systems. Interestingly, to preventfrom invading OECs,can reduce the expression levels of proteins linked to adhesion, FadA and FomA. Oral microorganisms can potentially provide immune protection for themselves or other bacteria by inhibiting the host immune system and promoting the disturbance of oral microbial homeostasis.

However, disruption of oral microbial homeostasis can occur when various external factors, such as diet, lifestyle, socioeconomic conditions and invasive viruses or bacteria, and internal factors, such as genetic makeup, secretory proteins in saliva, and the oral mucosal barrier, are modified (). Oral microbial homeostasis imbalance is strongly influenced by diet. Diet not only enhances the growth and persistence of certain periodontal pathogens but also hinders the growth of other bacteria. Participation in sports is thought to increase the chance of developing oral diseases because of the decrease in S-IgA and the increase in harmful bacteria in the oral cavity. Furthermore, smoking greatly changes the quantity of bacteria present in the oral cavity. Researchers found thatwere enriched and that the abundance of the phylumwas lower in smokers who were currently smoking than in nonsmokers,. Research has also revealed that the oral microbiome of African Americans and European Americans with low incomes differs depending on socioeconomic status; for example,andare more strongly associated with European Americans than with African Americans. Commensal microbiome may become pathogenic due to localized immunological dysfunction in an HIV-infected host. Furthermore, patients with periodontal disease have substantially different functional gene structures in their oral microbiome than healthy individuals. The oral pathogensandwere more prevalent in the salivary microbiome of IgA-deficient mice, whereas the proportion of the oral commensal bacteriawas much lower.

Overall, changes in the oral microbiome structure caused by pathogenic bacteria, as well as poorly controlled or defective host immune responses, are the main driving factors of oral microbial homeostasis imbalance. These modifications could lead to a pathological loop in which the oral microbiome and host homeostasis mutually strengthen each other and play a critical role in the initiation of disease.

Oral microbial homeostasis maintenance: The function of the oral commensal microbiome in bone health

The commensal microbiome, including oral commensal microbiome, is essential for maintaining bone health. The commensal microbiome are stable microbiome that develop as a result of the host's interaction with microbial communities that colonize anatomical areas such as the oral cavity, gut and skin. In the oral cavity, in addition to preventing oral opportunistic pathogens from occupying ecological niches to protect the host, the oral commensal microbiome also interacts with host tissues to suitably promote their structural and functional development. Bone remodeling is required for the host to repair damaged bone and maintain bone homeostasis. Normally, due to continuous tissue renewal and high amounts of mechanical stress, osteoblasts and osteoclasts in the alveolar bone regularly deposit and mineralize new alveolar bone during bone remodeling.

Oral commensal microbiome help maintain alveolar bone homeostasis by activating a variety of osteoclasts and osteoblast-related signaling pathways, thereby promoting their structural and functional development. The initial study on osteoimmunology investigated how the coexistence of oral microbiome affects the balance of alveolar bone. A study showed that normal specific-pathogen-free mice produced more osteoclasts than germ-free mice, resulting in greater loss of alveolar bone in healthy gum tissue. The oral commensal microbiome can regulate particular transcription factors to increase the expression of osteocalcin, which is an inhibitor of bone formation, in osteoblasts to avoid excessive bone mineralization and increase osteoblast and osteoclast activity. Therefore, alveolar bone homeostasis is thought to be strongly regulated by the oral microbiome since the oral microbiome and alveolar bone are very close to one another. It is unclear how exactly the oral commensal microbiome regulates alveolar bone homeostasis. However, some researchers suggest that this biological bone loss is an indicator of oral microbial homeostasis maintenance and that the oral commensal microbiome may regulate bone in a way similar to the gut commensal microbiome. Several researchers have recently shown that the gut commensal microbiome can also control alveolar bone homeostasis in mice without an oral microbiome and is associated with bone immune effects of segmented filamentous bacteria. However, the oral commensal microbiome has an osteoimmunomodulatory impact distinct from that of the systemic microbiome. Hence, further research is needed to provide additional information on the precise mechanisms through which the oral microbiome maintains alveolar bone homeostasis. The persistence of the oral commensal microbiome may also influence systemic bone homeostasis. After one week of uninterrupted intravenous administration of the oral commensal microbiome, scientists observed a notable reduction in bone mineral density in the distal femurs of mice. However, in-depth discussions at the mechanistic level, specifically about how oral commensal bacteria regulate systemic bone differently from alveolar bone, are needed.

The oral commensal microbiome can produce a wide range of biologically active metabolites, playing a crucial role in maintaining oral microbial homeostasis. Nitric oxide (NO) is a regulator of immunological, neurotransmission, and cardiovascular homeostasis that has also been found to be an essential regulatory molecule in bone, and it affects both osteoblasts and osteoclasts. The oral commensal microbiome of humans plays a key role in the nitrate-nitrite-NO (NO–NO–NO) process in food. However, the NO–NO–NO pathway could be disrupted, resulting in an NO deficit in vivo due to the lack of particular NO-reducing bacteria or alterations in the oral microbiome makeup. For instance, the use of antibacterial mouthwash decreases plasma levels of NO. In addition, the oral commensal microbiome may impact the health of oral and systemic bones by preserving NO homeostasis via the NO–NO–NO pathway. Studies have demonstrated that administering nitrate to mice elevates the levels of NO in the bloodstream and facilitates the alteration of the bone immune microenvironment, thereby enhancing bone remodeling in extraction sockets. The NO–NO–NO pathway represents a unique paradigm of a symbiotic relationship between an organism and its oral microbiome that also links oral microbial homeostasis and bone homeostasis. In addition, the oral commensal microbiome may also enhance bone health by metabolizing short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). A study suggested that the gut microbiome can stimulate the generation of insulin-like growth factor 1, a hormone that supports bone health. This stimulation can occur either directly or indirectly through the production of SCFAs during the fermentation process of the microbiome. Although the oral microbiome can also generate SCFAs, to date, there is no evidence that metabolites generated by the oral commensal microbiome can affect distant bone homeostasis in the same way as chemicals from the gut microbiome. However, in-depth research on whether the oral commensal microbiome can contribute to systemic bone health through these pathway is lacking, and further basic research with this aim in mind is needed.

Genetically, the composition or activity of the microbiome interacts dynamically with epigenetic modifications of the host organism. Recent studies of microbiome-induced changes in the host epigenome support the concept of a bidirectional “microbiome-epigenome axis”. The human microbiota and its metabolites can regulate gene expression and epigenetic programming in the host through epigenome modification. SCFAs secreted by gut microbiome affect the epigenome through DNA methylation and histone modification, and play a crucial role in host bone homeostasis and microbial homeostasis. Epigenetic modifications of the host by commensal microbiome represent broad and fundamental levels of regulation in early life development, homeostasis, and disease processes. Thus, oral commensal microbiome are likely involved in a variety of physiological processes, including the maintenance of bone homeostasis, by regulating host epigenetic modifications, although more research is needed to clarify this.

In conclusion, the maintenance of oral microbial homeostasis is a key factor in regulating alveolar bone homeostasis. In addition to the abovementioned findings on NO metabolism and SCFAs metabolism, whether other oral microbial metabolites are related to bone growth remains elusive. As new technologies continue to evolve and newly identified microbiome and their metabolites increase our understanding of the connection between bone homeostasis and the commensal microbiome, manipulating the microbiome or its metabolites may be a new intervention for bone health and growth in the future.

Oral microbial homeostasis imbalance: The role of oral microbiome in periodontal disease

Periodontal disease is a chronic inflammatory disease that affects about 20–50 % of the world's population, with clinical manifestations such as inflammation of the gingival tissue and alveolar bone destruction. Previously, the “red complex” bacteria comprises,, andwere thought to be the main cause of periodontal disease. However, based on the proposal of polymicrobial dysbiosis model and the discussion of a new paradigm in the pathogenesis of periodontal disease in recent years, the destruction of periodontal tissue may be explained by the imbalanced interaction between the oral microbiome and the overactivation of the host immune response, which leads to a shift from maintenance to imbalance in oral microbial homeostasis,,. For example, recent study has found that antimicrobial-induced oral microbial homeostasis imbalance exacerbates alveolar bone loss by increasing the production of host pro-inflammatory immune cells. In the context of this new pathogenesis, oral microbial homeostasis imbalance has become a key feature of periodontal disease. Specifically, the oral microbiome has shifted mainly from a symbiotic microbial community such asandto a dysbiotic microbial community such as phyla,,,and.

Today, the fact that healthy people and periodontal patients have different oral microbiome is no longer a novel conclusion. The key goal of oral microbiome research is to diagnose, treat, and prevent periodontal disease through differences in the oral microbiome. However, in the face of a large number of oral microbiomes that affect periodontal disease, traditional culture methods have the limitations of studying community-to-community interactions, and can only reflect a small part of the extremely diverse and complex human oral microbiome. In recent years, advances in omics technology have made it possible for the host oral microbiome to assess the progression and treatment of periodontal disease. For example, researchers have used metagenomic sequencing data and phylogenetic profiling to discover nine marker microbes that can distinguish between stable and progressive periodontitis. In addition, the researchers have used 16S rRNA gene targeted sequencing and metabolome to show that oral microbial homeostasis imbalance still persists even after dental treatment. This suggests the importance of reducing the risk of recurrence of periodontal disease by improving the oral microbiome.

In conclusion, periodontal disease is the result of the synergistic effect of the dysbiotic community of the oral microbiome. In the future, the modulation of the homeostatic imbalance of the oral microbiome will be an important measure for the clinical management of periodontal disease.

Oral microbial homeostasis imbalance: Oral microbiome changes in systemic bone-related diseases

Maintaining oral microbial homeostasis is essential for systemic bone balance. However, oral microbial homeostasis imbalance may lead to the occurrence of systemic bone-related diseases. Oral microbial homeostasis imbalance is the alteration of the relationship between the host and the microbiome, during which the organism shifts from a mutually beneficial state to a harmful one. In this section, we will discuss changes in the oral microbiome in people with systemic bone-related diseases, indicating that alterations in the oral microbiome may play a significant role in predicting the onset of systemic bone-related diseases early in the pathogenic process.

Rheumatoid arthritis

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic inflammatory disease in which the production of anti-citrullinated proteins antibodies (ACPAs) causes changes in protein citrullination. These changes result in chronic synovial inflammation, leading to irreversible damage and loss of function of cartilage and bone in the joints. Recently, the connection between RA and periodontitis has increasingly garnered attention from both researchers and the medical community studying systemic diseases. The presence of, andDNA in the synovial fluid and elevated levels of antibodies against, andin both serum and synovial fluid have been observed in RA patients,,,. And, andcan chemically alter proteins by citrullinating them, resulting in excessive production of citrullinated proteins,,. This then stimulats immune cells to generate ACPAs, and ultimately, this immune response can lead to joint inflammation and attack,,.

A growing body of research is also focusing on changes in the oral microbiome in patients with RA. By employing multiplex-454 pyrophosphate sequencing to analyze the subgingival microbiome in individuals with and without RA, researchers revealed that only RA patients exhibited the presence ofandspecies. Patients with RA have a greater abundance of gram-negative anaerobic species and more pathogenic species, such asandin their oral microbiome than healthy individuals, while they experience a reduction in health-associated species, such asandin subgingival microbial communities. A single study revealed that individuals with early RA and those at risk had comparable oral microbiomes, but they exhibited a greater proportion of potentially inflammatory species than healthy control individuals did. Indeed, alterations in the oral microbiome are important for the onset of RA. The group at risk, which tested positive for anticyclic citrullinated peptide, had an imbalanced subgingival microbiome with a greater abundance ofthan the control group. Oral microbial homeostasis imbalance usually occurs during the early stage of RA. This imbalance enhances an individual's vulnerability to RA and is associated with systemic autoimmune characteristics.

Taken together, oral microbial homeostasis imbalance increases the risk of developing RA, suggesting that there is a reciprocal strengthening of connections between oral microbiome and the immune networks of the host in the context of autoimmune diseases. Therefore, further in-depth and extensive studies are needed to determine the role of imbalanced oral microbial homeostasis in autoimmune diseases.

Osteoarthritis

Osteoarthritis (OA) is a highly common form of arthritis that is characterized by abnormal remodeling of the bone beneath the cartilage, inflammation in the synovial membrane, and gradual deterioration of the articular cartilage. Recent studies have shown substantial changes in the oral microbiome of patients with OA. The oral microbiomes of patients with OA and healthy individuals were analyzed by comparing saliva samples using 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, and the results indicated that patients with OA had a greater abundance of oral opportunistic pathogens, such as, than healthy individuals. Currently, there is a lack of research on the specific mechanisms through which the oral microbiome may contribute to OA compared to RA. Although researchers have recognized the existence of oral microbiome DNA in individuals with OA,, the process by which this DNA is transmitted from the oral cavity to the joints is still not fully understood. It has been proposed that oral microbial DNA from RA patients may be transported to joints through bloodstream circulation, migration of nonimmune cells, and intracellular capture of other immune cells such as phagocytes. These hypotheses provide some ideas for studying the mechanism of oral microbial transport to the distal joints, but they still need to be further validated.

All in all, there is an imbalance in oral microbial homeostasis in patients with OA, but it is unclear whether it is a causal relationship between oral microbiome and osteoarthritis. The current studies on the correlation between OA and the oral microbiome are in the initial phases. In the future, additional experiments that focus on abnormal bacterial alterations in the oral microbiome of OA patients are needed to explore the pathogenic mechanisms of OA.

Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis (OP) is a common condition affecting the skeletal system that is characterized by irregularities in bone structure and reduced bone density. OP leads to heightened vulnerability to fractures and poses a significant public health concern for the expanding elderly population. Until the beginning of the 21st century, the relationship between periodontal disease and OP was controversial according to initial clinical studies, but recent studies have provided more convincing evidence of an association between the two diseases. For instance, one nationwide population-based cross sectional study showed that patients with periodontitis who were unable to maintain good oral hygiene had 6.02-fold risk of developing OP than patients without periodontitis. One longitudinal follow-up study showed that the risk of OP in patients with mild, moderate, or severe periodontitis was increased 1.56-fold, 2.09-fold, or 2.08-fold, respectively, compared with that in patients without periodontitis. Furthermore, a meta-analysis indicated that individuals diagnosed with OP have an increased likelihood of developing periodontitis, while those with periodontitis are at a greater risk of OP. It has been shown that the saliva microbiome of patients with periodontitis aggravates femoral resorption in ovariectomized (OVX) rats. An observational cross-sectional study showed that while nearly 79 % of women with periodontitis had OP, but there was no statistically significant difference in some common periodontal pathogens () detected in the oral microbiome of postmenopausal females with and without OP.

In summary, there seems to be a two-way relationship between oral microbial homeostasis imbalance and OP. However, research on the role of oral microbiome in OP is still limited, and most of the studies are conducted using OVX rat models. What’s more, there is a lack of research investigating the comprehensive alterations in the oral microbiome in OP patients using next-generation sequencing techniques. This avenue holds great potential and could enhance our understanding of the association between oral microbial homeostasis imbalance and OP.

Osteomyelitis

Osteomyelitis (OM) is a serious disease of bone tissue destruction caused by infection with pathogenic microorganisms. Several clinical cases on the oral microbiome and OM have been reported. Oralinfection led to the development of widespread OM in the middle and distal phalanges of the right ring finger in a male patient aged 58 years. Another medical study documented a case of chronic periodontal disease in a 75-year-old man who experienced uncommon anaerobic bacteria in his oral cavity. A combination ofandbacteremia was observed, and these bacteria eventually led to OM in the femur. OM of the long bones with muscle abscess caused bywas also observed in an immunocompetent patient. Most of the patients in these clinical reports had multiple underlying medical conditions, and the occurrence of OM was most likely due to transient bacteremia caused by dental surgery, resulting in hematogenous seeding of oral microorganisms and ultimately infection of immunocompromised areas. Moreover, the new generation of sequencing methods also provides convenience for exploring the role of microbiome regulation in OM. In a recent study of the oral microbiome in chronic nonbacterial OM based on high-throughput next-generation sequencing technology, the oral microbiome composition and bacterial colonization across oral sites in children and adolescents with chronic nonbacterial OM were significantly different from those in healthy adults. However, it is unclear whether it is caused by the development of the oral microbiome of the body itself or related to OM.

In summary, bacteremia is very likely to occur in the body under the imbalance of oral microbial homeostasis, resulting in pathogenic bacteria originally in the oral cavity reaching all bone marrow parts of the body. However, further research is needed on whether alterations in the oral microbiome play a role in OM.

Major pathways by which oral microbial homeostasis imbalance affects systemic bone-related diseases

The oral microbiome cooperates with the host immune system during oral microbial homeostasis maintenance. However, when oral microbial homeostasis is disrupted, the oral microbiome can spread outside the oral cavity and affect the host systemically. The oral microbiome affects systemic bone-related diseases through three pathways: (1) distant transmission of oral pathogens, (2) through the oral-gut axis, and (3) systemic inflammation ().

Distant transmission of oral pathogens

Due to the proximity to the highly vascularized periodontal environment, the oral microbiome might temporarily trigger bacteremia when chewing, brushing, flossing, or oral manipulation occurs. Studies have demonstrated that the likelihood of bacteremia increases when there is an imbalance in oral microbial homeostasis. The proliferation and expansion of the periodontal vascular system create more surface area, increasing the ability of the microbiome to penetrate the epithelial barrier, reach the connective tissue beneath the gingiva, and reach the bloodstream. There, they can spread to a variety of target organs and cause subclinical, acute, or chronic reactions. In addition, oral pathogenic bacteria can directly produce virulence factors that lead to gingival epithelial barrier dysfunction. For example,can cause infiltration of the oral mucosa by targeting the expression of grainyhead-like 2 in OECs and hindering the expression of connexin. This weakens the protective barrier of the epithelium and leads to bacteremia throughout the body. Animal experiments have shown that grainyhead-like 2 conditional knockout mice have markedly greater blood loads of oral bacteria, including, and, than wild-type mice. Although there is a wide range of microbiome residing in the oral cavity, only a limited number of species are presently identified in experimental bacteremia. This limited detection could be attributed to the capacity of these species to interact or attach to specific substances in the bloodstream, enabling them to avoid detection and facilitate the transmission of the disease to remote locations. For example,can enter the circulation, bind to erythrocytes and protect them from oxidative stress via rubrerythrin, a nonheme iron protein, providing an advantage for distal organ dissemination,.

In addition to those of the parent bacteria, the passage of oral microbiome-derived molecules and bacterial extracellular vesicles (EVs) through the somatic circulation to nonoral skeletal sites may be a potential pathway through which oral microbial homeostasis imbalance mediates systemic bone-related diseases. The host TLRs signaling pathway can detect oral microbe-related molecular patterns, including lipopolysaccharides (LPS), lipoproteins, flagellin, DNA, and RNA, leading to a range of immune and inflammatory responses. Prior studies have indicated that elevated levels of LPS and LPS-binding protein in the systemic and synovial fluids of individuals are associated with increased severity of inflammatory reactions and joint deterioration in patients with OA of the knee. Rapid intraperitoneal injection of the oral pathogenLPS causes transient bacteremia in OVX model mice. Furthermore, substantial quantities of DNA from the oral microbiome have been detected in the synovial tissue and synovial fluid of individuals with OA. Researchers have also found the same DNA in the dental plaque and synovial fluid of patients with OA combined with periodontal disease, and this DNA is a cue for the oral bacteriaand. The perinuclear region of mouse ankle tissue cells showed the presence ofwhen a combination ofwas orally administered, and bacterial DNA was detected in the heart, liver, kidney, and lung of mice infected with multiple bacteria, both with and without collagen-induced arthritis. The authors suggested thatmay have migrated to the synovial joint through hematogenous dissemination. EVs are enclosed by a lipid bilayer and can transport diverse bioactive molecules of bacterial origin to remote host tissues. EVs, including urine, saliva, synovial fluid, blood, and feces, have been found in bodily fluids of humans. According to a recent investigation, EVs derived from the periodontopathogenic bacteriumcan accumulate in the long bones of mice following intraperitoneal injection and thereby impact the overall balance of bone homeostasis. EVs harboring the virulence factor FadA fromcan stimulate the Rab5a GTPase, which is associated with the movement of vesicles and subsequently movement into joints.

Collectively, we propose that oral pathogens or their derived molecules and bacterial EVs are very likely to reach distant nonoral bone sites through blood circulation when oral microbial homeostasis is out of balance, triggering host immune responses and leading to systemic bone-related diseases. Furthermore, exploring the impact of derivative molecules isolated from diverse oral microbiome on bone homeostasis via different methods of administration may provide additional insights into the development of systemic bone-related diseases.

Oral-gut axis

The oral cavity serves as the gateway to the digestive system. Recent evidence suggests that the transfer of oral microbiome to the gut can potentially cause dysbiosis in the gut ecosystem. For example, the oral bacteria of individuals with periodontitis can decrease the amount of unsaturated fats in dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis, increase the metabolism of arachidonic acid, and ultimately contribute to an imbalance in gut ecology and worsen colitis.has been found to influence gut ecological dysbiosis by increasing citrullinated protein levels in the gut. Furthermore, gut ecological dysbiosis caused by long-term antibiotic use can lead to Th17/Treg cell imbalance, which disrupts oral microbial homeostasis. These studies indicate that when oral microbial homeostasis is disrupted, oral bacteria may travel to the digestive system through swallowing and impact gut microbial homeostasis. Similarly, oral microbial homeostasis seems to have a reciprocal influence on gut microbial homeostasis.

Studies indicate that the connection between the oral and the gut could significantly impact the disruption of oral microbial homeostasis, which in turn can influence the development of systemic diseases. After the researchers gave the saliva microbiome of periodontitis patients and healthy gums to germ-free mice, they found that the dysbiotic oral microbiome would alter the systemic metabolism by modifying the gut microbiome of germ-free mice. The regulation of systemic bone-related diseases and associated mechanisms has been emphasized in recent research, focusing on the gut-bone axis and the gut-joint axis,. An investigation using metagenomic shotgun sequencing and metagenome-wide association analysis was conducted using fecal, dental, and salivary samples obtained from individuals with RA and healthy individuals. The study revealed similarities in the abundance and function of the oral and gut microbiomes, indicating an overlap between the two. Additionally, ecological dysbiosis through the oral-gut axis was observed in both the oral and gut microbiomes of RA patients, and it has been demonstrated that the salivary microbiome of OVX rats with periodontitis worsens femoral resorption. In addition, mice that exhibit an imbalance in their gut microbiome caused by receiving-expressing peptidyl arginine deiminase orally exhibit an increased immune response, more severe arthritis, and significantly lower bone mineral density. According to a recent investigation, periodontitis potentially disrupts the balance of the gut microbiome in ApoE-/- mice, affecting systemic bone homeostasis. In particular, periodontitis changes the composition of the gut microbiome and causes mild inflammation in the colon and bloodstream. Interestingly, transferring the gut microbiome from periodontitis mice to antibiotic-treated mice partially recapitulates the characteristics observed in the bone and colon.

The gut microbiome, as the predominant human microbiome, is richer in strains and metabolites than the oral microbiome, and the number studies on its association with bone have increased in recent years. The gut microbiome may be highly involved in the crosstalk between oral microbiome and systemic bone homeostasis. Periodontal disease greatly diminishes the proportion of bacteria in the gut microbiome that produce butyrate. The gut metabolite butyrate reduces the production of autoantibodies and bone erosion in RA. These findings suggest that metabolites in the gut may be involved in the relationship between oral microbial homeostasis imbalance and systemic bone-related diseases. Therefore, in the future, we should further investigate the connection with the gut microbiome and design experiments related to the oral microbiome and systemic bone homeostasis relying on the gut microbiome and its metabolites.

Systemic inflammation

Numerous types of injuries, such as bacterial infections, trauma, and chemical issues, can induce inflammatory responses in the host. The oral microbiome biological burden and inflammatory state are positively associated. The infiltration of oral bacteria in the bloodstream and alterations in the connection between the oral and gut microbiome could trigger endotoxemia and systemic inflammation.

The development of oral and nonoral bone-related diseases is significantly influenced by systemic inflammation, which can act as a crucial mechanistic connection between these diseases. For instance, joint and systemic inflammation are observed in Lewis rats after oral exposure toat 4 and 8 months, and inflammatory cell infiltration and cortical bone erosion and a reduction in the ankle joint are observed at 8 months. Initially, the oral microbiome can induce host cells to produce various proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and interleukin-1β (IL-1β). These cytokines also initiate inflammatory reactions, resulting in systemic bone-related diseases. Transient bacteremia occurs in OVX model mice following the rapid injection ofLPS, leading to a temporary increase in the serum levels of IL-6, osteoprotegerin (OPG), and receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL). In vivo, TLR2 signaling is responsible for the increase in the serum levels of IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-1β, which are osteoclast-activating cytokines produced by EVs derived from, and this process has an impact on systemic bone homeostasis. The lipoprotein virulence factor of() can stimulate the synthesis of the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6, leading to significant bone depletion in mice. Moreover, TNF-α has a crucial impact on the pathophysiology of bone and affects bone homeostasis through various mechanisms, including the stimulation of osteoclast generation and simultaneous suppression of osteoblast activity. Studies have demonstrated that periodontitis exacerbates femoral bone loss induced by OVX in mice, and it is suggested that a continuous increase in the serum TNF-α concentration might significantly impact this mechanism.

In addition to inducing the production of proinflammatory factors, oral pathogens can modulate inflammatory responses by influencing inflammatory cells. When there is an imbalance between oral bacteria and the immune response of the host, the host may produce T cells that damage the bone in an attempt to defend against the invasion of pathogens, resulting in bone injury.can expedite the activation of synovial fibroblasts by means of dendritic cells, macrophages, and neutrophils that migrate into the joints of mice afflicted with collagen-induced arthritis. The bacteria responsible for OM areand, and research has demonstrated that both EVs possess potent cytolytic and immunomodulatory effects. They are taken up by THP-1 cells, and they enhance the expression of the TLR3 gene, induce NF-κB activation, and stimulate the secretion of IL-8, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, matrix metalloproteinase-9, and IL-10. According to a recent study, FadA present in EVs ofcan influence synovial macrophages. This leads to the activation of the Rab5a GTPase and YB-1,consequently triggering a localized inflammatory response that worsens RA. Recently, it has been demonstrated that-derived EVs also encourage M0-type macrophages to transform into proinflammatory M1-type macrophages, aggravating periodontitis and alveolar bone loss. It has not been reported that oral pathogens can affect systemic bone-related diseases by modulating macrophage polarization, but the above studies suggest that this pathway may be a future direction for the study of systemic bone-related diseases.

Although inflammatory responses are crucial for organisms to resist various external stresses, they are detrimental to organisms under conditions of oral microbial homeostasis imbalance. Oral pathogenic bacteria are highly likely to trigger or maintain inflammatory responses, such as increased production of proinflammatory factors and modulation of inflammatory cell function, and these signals ultimately lead to the progression of systemic bone-related diseases through modulation of osteoblast-osteoclast activity. With the introduction of the new terminology “osteoimmunology”, “osteomicrobiology”, and “oral osteomicrobiology”, it has become easier to connect the oral microbiome, the host immune system, and bone homeostasis to find a balance between the three.

Oral microbial homeostasis imbalance disrupts bone homeostasis

At the microscopic level, bacteria relocated from the oral cavity and the resulting harmful substances disrupt the balance between bone formation and resorption by influencing various types of cells, such as bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs), chondrocytes, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts ().

Regulate the osteogenic differentiation capacity of BMMSCs

BMMSCs can differentiate into various cell types, such as osteoblasts and chondrocytes, and involve in immunomodulation and tissue repair. Human BMMSCs can express TLR3 and TLR4, which limits T-cell modulatory function through Notch signaling. Many findings on how oral bacterial LPS induces osteogenic development in BMMSCs have been described. One study showed that LPS activated TLR4-mediated NF-κB signaling but did not alter the osteogenic differentiation of BMMSCs. Another study showed that neitherLPS norlipophosphatidic acid affected BMMSCs proliferation but that prolonging the duration of LPS action enhanced the osteogenic differentiation of BMMSCs. The ability of BMMSCs to block activated T cells was also enhanced by low concentrations ofLPS (0.1 g/ml), which also promoted osteogenic differentiation and BMMSCs proliferation. However, negative effects were observed when the concentration ofLPS (10 g/ml) was high. Moreover, BMMSCs can take upLPS-stimulated macrophages. This leads to an increase in the levels of IL-6 and TNF-α while inhibiting the transcription of alkaline phosphatase, type I collagen, and runt-related transcription factor 2, consequently hindering BMMSCs osteogenesis.EVs can also reduce the osteogenic differentiation of BMMSCs.

Promote chondrocytes apoptosis

Bone formation, particularly in long-axis bones, cannot occur without endochondral ossification, but chondrocytes maintain joint tissues until maturity, playing a critical role in the psychological cushioning of joints throughout postnatal motions. A recent study revealed that the density of chondrocytes in OA was lower in the experimental group that underwent knee surgery and experimental periodontitis than in the control group that did not undergo knee surgery. This difference may be related to the fact that the oral microbiome causes chondrocyte apoptosis. For example, in vitro research has demonstrated thatattaches to and invades primary human chondrocytes, significantly altering their cell cycle (increasing the G(1) phase and decreasing the G(2) phase) and encouraging apoptosis. Further investigation revealed that the levels of markers of early and late apoptosis in chondrocytes significantly increased after infection withand heightened apoptosis could contribute to the joint deterioration observed in RA. In addition,strains may also infiltrate chondrocytes, causing a substantial increase in the expression of the enzyme matrix metalloproteinase-13 and breakdown of the extracellular matrix. The PGDHC ofhas been demonstrated to enhance the release of prostaglandin E2 mediated by IL-1β in primary cultures of gingival fibroblasts, leading to increased apoptosis in chondrocytes, and this process may result in cartilage degeneration and joint deformation,.

Disrupt osteoblasts-osteoclasts balance

To maintain bone homeostasis, osteoblasts and osteoclasts, which are responsible for bone formation and bone resorption, collaborate and mutually regulate each other. In vitro experiments have shown thatcan infiltrate osteoblasts, hindering their development and mineralization. The EVs ofand the oral commensal bacteriumtrigger TLR2, increasing osteoclast differentiation and osteoblast factor expression in osteoclast precursors. The RANKL/OPG ratio increases in a model of alveolar bone loss whenstimulates the expression of IL-36γ in OECs. They are also able to invade osteoblasts in vivo, where they may temporarily increase bone formation in infected mice due to a compensatory microbial mechanism. In addition, LPS produced bycan stimulate the formation of osteoclasts by binding to TLR4. The production of lysine gingipain bycan lead to the degradation of OPG, which in turn inhibits the differentiation of osteoclasts by means of TNF-α and IL-1β while also inducing the differentiation of osteoclasts through IL-17A. In a model of cranial bone loss, LPS produced bycan stimulate the formation of periosteal osteoclasts and bone resorption by activating RANKL in osteoblasts via TLR2, leading to cranial bone resorption.-produced PGDHC can stimulate osteoclastogenesis induced by RANKL by interacting with nonmuscle myosin II-A, which is a regulator of osteoclast fusion. Under RANKL stimulation in vitro, a significant interaction has been discovered between PGDHC and host lysosomal cathepsin B (a protease that promotes enhanced inflammatory osteolysis), and the two proteins can bind to one another to promote osteoclast formation. Regarding the model of bone loss in long bones, a study has shown that the injection of LPS directly leads to the production of membrane-bound PGE synthase-1, which generates prostaglandin E2 (a powerful stimulant for bone resorption), ultimately leading to the loss of femoral bones in mice. In mice,lipoproteins and their mimic lipopeptides Pam2CSK4 and Pam3CSK4 could utilize three mechanisms, namely, the activation of the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6, the promotion of osteoclast differentiation through TLR2- and MyD88-dependent signaling pathways, and an increase in the RANKL/OPG ratio-induced systemic bone loss. A recent investigation revealed groundbreaking findings that EVs originating fromtrigger the development of osteoclasts by increasing the levels of the osteoclast-stimulating cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β through TLR2 in vivo, resulting in widespread bone deterioration.

In summary, current studies have clearly explored the mechanism of oral microbiome leading to systemic abnormal bone homeostasis from the perspective of disrupting osteoblasts-osteoclasts balance. In addition, oral microbiome and their derived molecules have shown different roles in regulating BMMSCs and chondrocytes in vitro experiments, but there is still a lack of in vivo experimental design for them in the model of systemic bone-related diseases. Importantly, there may be a multi-target synergistic effect on the regulation of abnormal bone homeostasis, and further research is still needed to explore its potential mechanism of action in the future.

Restoring oral microbial homeostasis: Promising diagnosis and treatment of systemic bone-related diseases

As we mentioned above, alterations in the oral microbiome may be key in predicting the early progression of systemic bone-related diseases. Oral microbial markers to assist in the diagnosis of systemic bone-related diseases will be an economical and simple new method. In addition, a recent study showed that nanoparticles successfully restored periodontal homeostasis by reestablishing macrophage function in the oral cavity and alleviated periodontal inflammation to improve impaired cognitive function in mice. Therefore, restoring and restructuring unbalanced oral microbial homeostasis could serve as a successful approach for preventing and managing systemic bone-related diseases ().

Oral microbiome-assisted diagnosis

The oral microbiome could be used as a biomarker to predict and screen for systemic bone-related diseases. Using 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, a study examining the composition and variations in the oral microbiome of individuals with RA or OA and healthy individuals identified the use eight specific oral microbial biomarkersas a potential diagnostic approach to distinguish between RA and OA. A recently discovered species of oral, known assp.., has genetic variability at the strain level and can be used to differentiate among RA patients, their first-degree relatives and the general population. In addition, metagenomic linkage groups analysis of the salivary microbiome revealed that RA-32522 was exclusively found in RA patients and their healthy relatives, but unclassifiedsp. was found in healthy controls. These data suggested that the potential role of the oral microbiome in predicting and screening systemic bone-related diseases. However, it is necessary to confirm these markers in larger cohort studies, and animal models can be utilized to validate whether these bacterial markers can contribute to the development of systemic bone-related diseases.

Probiotics

Probiotics may be used to improve oral microbiome resilience and reverse the ecological imbalance of the oral microbiome,. The application ofHN019 as a probiotic on the surface alters the makeup of the oral cavity, resulting in increased levels ofand-like species and decreased levels ofandintermedia-like species. Additionally, numerous studies have demonstrated that probiotic therapy reverses the ecological imbalance of systemic bone homeostasis and reduces inflammatory reactions,. For example, in rats deficient in sex steroids, the regular administration of the probioticGG or the commercially available probiotic supplement VSL#3 completely halted the deterioration of bones. The chondroitin sulfate-mediated attenuation of OA can be amplified by combinations of multistrain live probiotics. In addition, male mice with increased trabecular bone volume following oral administration ofexhibited increased femoral and vertebral formation. Oral administration of the live or heat-killed probioticMJ2 prevents bone loss in rats that have undergone OVX, and this process may improve the differentiation and mineralization of osteoblasts by activating the OPG/RANKL signaling pathway through the use of surface proteins. Taken together, these findings lead to the hypothesis that gut probiotics may be more effective at treating systemic bone-related diseases by restoring oral microbial homeostasis through the oral-gut axis.

The homeostatic delivery of MSCs

Due to their robust immunomodulatory capabilities, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which are capable of self-renewal and multilineage differentiation, have been employed extensively to treat many diseases. Increasing evidence suggests that the therapeutic benefits of MSCs primarily arise from their EVs. Studies have demonstrated that MSCs EVs stimulate the polarization of macrophages toward the M2 phenotype, thereby facilitating bone regeneration in RA. Moreover, MSCs EVs effectively hinder the differentiation of osteoclasts, thereby improving bone resorption in OVX and hindlimb unloading-induced OP mice models,. The homeostasis of MSCs is influenced significantly by the oral microbiome. The equilibrium between harmful oral bacteria and beneficial probiotics supports the movement and formation of bone tissue and the growth of MSCs. However, an imbalanced oral microbiome impairs MSCs function. In summary, oral microbial homeostasis may influence the efficacy of MSCs homeostasis in the treatment of systemic bone-related diseases.

Oral microbiota transplantation

To reverse and ameliorate oral microbial homeostasis imbalance, a novel method known as oral microbiota transplantation (OMT), which is based on fecal microbiota transplantation, was recently developed. Recent studies have indicated that OMT could regulate and remodel the microbiome composition in dogs with naturally occurring periodontitis, and alleviate radiotherapy-induced oral mucositis in mice. In addition, OMT has been proposed for the treatment of oral microbiome-mediated autoimmune diseases. Fecal microbiota transplantation improves bone loss in mice with OVX-induced osteoporosis by inhibiting the release of osteoclastic cytokines in systemic bone-related diseases. These findings indicate that OMT has the potential to be an effective method for managing systemic bone-related diseases.

Further directions on oral microbial homeostasis in systemic bone-related diseases

At present, the research on oral microbiome and systemic bone-related diseases is still in its infancy, and further research on pathogenesis and disease management is still worthy in the future.

First, the oral microbiome plays a role in different aspects of energy balance, but further exploration of its byproducts is needed. The impact and mechanisms of gut microbiome byproducts (e.g., SCFAs) on the progression of systemic bone-related diseases have been investigated. With the existence of the oral-gut axis becoming increasingly clear, the effect of oral and gut microbial metabolite interactions on systemic bone homeostasis is also worth further exploration.

Moreover, accurate analysis of the composition and function of the oral microbiome will contribute to the diagnosis of systemic bone-related diseases. The utilization of novel technologies, such as genomics and metabolomics is critical in the future, which may improve our understanding of the complex interactions between the oral microbial ecosystem, the immune system, and bone, and provide new oral microbiome targets for the diagnosis and treatment of systemic bone-related diseases.

Furthermore, homeostatic regulation of the oral microbiome has emerged as a potential intervention, and probiotics, homeostatic delivery of MSCs, and OMT will provide a new direction for the treatment of systemic bone-related diseases. In the future, it may be possible to establish early prevention or prognostic models for systemic bone-related diseases throughout the body by maintaining or reshaping oral microbial homeostasis to provide a new approach for disease management.

Nowadays, modern medicine has gradually opened the era of precision medicine with the goal of personalized medicine, and there has been an international consensus report on precision diabetes medicine. The research of oral microbiome in the diagnosis and treatment of periodontal disease and systemic bone-related diseases has initially demonstrated its great potential in the development of precision medicine. However, in the future, it is still necessary to establish disease risk prediction and treatment prognosis evaluation based on oral microbiome big data, and consider the many challenges of integrating oral microbiome information into daily clinical practice.

Conclusion and perspectives

The interaction of oral microbiome with the host results in oral microbial homeostasis. Various internal and external factors can cause a shift from homeostasis maintenance to imbalance, but additional research is needed to determine which oral microbiome are specific to which homeostatic state. The epidemiological association between systemic bone-related diseases, including RA, OA, OP, and OM has garnered increasing attention in recent years. In laboratory animals, oral microbiome play specific roles in the development of RA and OP. However, studies on RA frequently focus on autoimmune conditions and may overlook the possibility that bone homeostasis plays a role in the disease pathophysiology. Studies on other conditions, such as OA and OM, are still in the exploratory stage, and some of these findings are controversial. In addition, the homeostatic imbalance of the oral microbiome described in this review are based on periodontal disease. Thus, it is not yet known whether diseases other than periodontal disease, such as dental caries and oral candidiasis, that cause oral microbial homeostasis imbalance can also cause disruptions in homeostasis that cause systemic diseases. Distant transmission, oral-gut microbial transfer, and inflammatory reactions are the key well-established routes through which oral bacteria affect systemic bone-related diseases. There are also additional potential pathways, including metabolic and immunological pathways, that we could research. The oral microbiome alters the osteogenic differentiation potential of BMMSCs, promotes chondrocyte death, and impairs the osteoblast–osteoclast balance; however, further validation is needed. The detection of oral microbial species in the oral cavity of healthy people and patients with systemic bone-related diseases could lead to simple and easy-to-operate new methods for diagnosing systemic bone-related diseases, but its sensitivity and specificity compared with those of the current gold standard have yet to be verified. Probiotics, homeostatic delivery of MSCs, and OMT related to oral microbial homeostasis will provide a new direction for the treatment of systemic bone-related diseases, but the potential challenges such as targeting and safety need to be considered before they can be applied to the clinical treatment of systemic bone-related diseases.

Funding

This work was supported by(), Guangzhou Science and Technology Elite “Navigation” Project ().