Background

Gingivitis is an acute or chronic inflammation of the gingival tissue surrounding the tooth, characterized by redness, swelling and bleeding of the gingiva []. It is a public oral health problem which is highly prevalent across different populations. In China, the fourth national oral health epidemiology survey conducted in 2015 demonstrated that 87.4% of 35- to 44-year-olds had gingival bleeding, an increase of 10.1% compared to 2005 []. In the United Kingdom, 52.9% of adults were shown to have gingival bleeding in the Adult Dental Health Survey of 2018 []. In separate studies conducted in 2017, 76% of UK dentist attendees, aged 18–92, had bleeding on probing [] while in a French study 63.2% of adults self-reported gingival bleeding [].

Dental plaque is a primary cause of gingivitis []. The bacteria in plaque produce enzymes and toxins that irritate soft tissues surrounding the teeth (the gingiva), leading to gingival inflammation and weakening of the connection between the tooth and gingiva []. If gingivitis is not effectively managed, it can progress to periodontitis, negatively impacting quality of life and having systemic consequences [–]. Adequate oral hygiene practices play a crucial role in preventing and controlling gingivitis by reducing the accumulation of dental plaque [].

Twice-daily brushing with toothpaste serves to physically remove plaque, whereas incorporating antimicrobial agents into toothpaste can enhance plaque control [,]. A fluoride toothpaste incorporating a three-enzyme system (amyloglucosidase, glucose oxidase and lactoperoxidase) has been developed to enhance natural microbial control in the oral cavity. Amyloglucosidase and glucose oxidase generate hydrogen peroxide from polyglucans, and lactoperoxidase oxidizes salivary thiocyanate into hypothiocyanite in the presence of hydrogen peroxide [,]. Both hydrogen peroxide and hypothiocyanite exhibit potent antimicrobial activity and have been shown to effectively inhibit periodontal pathogens [,,]. This toothpaste also contains three proteins reflecting saliva’s natural defence mechanisms: bovine colostrum containing immunoglobulin IgG, lactoferrin and lysozyme. Immunoglobulin provides protection against infection, lactoferrin inhibits the metabolic activity of several oral pathogens and lysozyme breaks down peptidoglycan, which is an essential part of the cell wall of the gram-positive bacteria [–].

With regular use over a 14-week period, this toothpaste containing enzymes and proteins has been shown to promote an overall shift in the bacterial community, with an increase in gingival health-associated bacterial species and a decrease in abundance of periodontitis-associated bacterial species []. Furthermore, there is evidence that toothpaste containing enzymes and proteins enhances salivary defences by increasing the levels of antimicrobial compounds lysozyme and hydrogen peroxide in vivo, as well as hypothiocyanite in vitro []. A clinical study in a United Kingdom (UK) population demonstrated significant improvements in gingival health after 13 weeks use of the toothpaste containing enzymes and proteins compared to control fluoride toothpaste []. Furthermore, an epidemiological study in Denmark reported better gingival condition in participants who had used the toothpaste containing enzymes and proteins for at least 12 months compared to control group who used toothpastes that did not contain antimicrobial actives []. The purpose of this current clinical study was to investigate if the gingival health benefits provided by this toothpaste were transferrable to another study population.

The primary objective of the current study was to compare the efficacy of this enzyme and protein containing toothpaste with a regular fluoride toothpaste in Chinese adult population with gingival problems after 13 weeks of twice-daily use, as measured by Löe-Silness Gingival Index (GI) []. Secondary objectives included the efficacy as measured by GI after 4 and 26 weeks of use, and plaque reduction measured by Modified Quigley and Hein Plaque Index (MQHPI) [] after 4, 13 and 26 weeks of use.

The null hypothesis was that the enzyme and protein containing toothpaste would not improve gingival condition nor reduce supragingival plaque compared to regular fluoride toothpaste in Chinese adult population with gingival problems after 13 weeks of twice-daily use.

Materials and methods

Participants and study design

This was a 26 week, double-blind (participant/examiner/statistician/investigator), randomised, two group, parallel design study conducted at a University Dental Hospital in Xi’an, China from October 2018 to April 2019. The overall test design, as well as the measurement of gingival health, followed the guideline WS/T 326.3–2010 for evaluating efficacy in inhibiting dental plaque and/or reducing gingival inflammation []. The study was approved by a local ethics committee prior to enrolment of the first participant. This study is reported according to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials statement (CONSORT 2010) for parallel group randomised trials [].

Volunteers attending screening were informed of the study purpose, and those who gave written informed consent were assessed for eligibility according to inclusion and exclusion criteria and had a dental assessment. The key inclusion criteria were: (1) aged 18–70 years, of either sex and in good general health; (2) had at least 20 natural teeth without subgingival calculus, including five assessable teeth (excluding third molars) in each quadrant; (3) had a mean GI ≥ 1.0 and a mean MQHPI ≥ 1.5 at screening and baseline. Participants who had the following situations were excluded: (1) pregnant or breastfeeding; (2) obvious signs of untreated caries or significant periodontal disease; (3) full or partial dentures wearers; (4) current orthodontic treatment; (5) smokers, or who have a recent smoking history, including e-cigarettes; (6) diabetics; (7) received a course of anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial or statin medication within 4 weeks of screening. (8) dental prophylaxis in the month prior to enrolment.

Study procedure

Qualified participants were randomly allocated to use test or control toothpaste (Table) by study staff. The control toothpaste was selected as a negative control due to the absence of any known antimicrobial ingredients beyond fluoride. The examiner was blinded to product allocation. A stratified block randomisation schedule (block size of four) was generated by the statistician using Proc Plan procedure in SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) suitable for a two-group parallel design. Sex was considered as a stratification factor. The test toothpaste was provided in a plain white tube while the control toothpaste was overwrapped in white to aid study blinding. Both toothpastes were provided in the same size tube. Labels on both toothpastes differed only by an alphanumeric code. To maintain uniformity between groups, all participants were provided with a soft bristle toothbrush (Sanxiao, China).

Table 1

Study products

Toothpaste

Description

Test toothpaste

Unilever Enzymatic technology toothpaste – Silica toothpaste containing 1450 ppm sodium fluoride, lactoferrin, colostrum, amyloglucosidase, glucose oxidase, lactoperoxidase and potassium thiocyanate

Control toothpaste

Sensodyne Pronamel- Silica toothpaste containing 1450 ppm sodium fluoride

During the study phase, participants were instructed to use only their allocated toothbrush and toothpaste, brushing for at least one minute twice daily (morning and evening) for 26 weeks. The amount of toothpaste used each time was required to cover the bristle head of toothbrush. Participants were educated in the correct brushing technique and were supervised by the same person while brushing at the baseline, week 4 and week 13 visits. Participants recorded each use of the study product in a diary and were required to bring their toothpaste to each post-baseline visit for weighing.

The participants underwent clinical assessments at the study site by a single assessor at baseline, and after 4 weeks, 13 weeks and 26 weeks of product use. Prior to the study, intra-examiner calibration was conducted for Gl and MQHPI assessments, and the kappa coefficient was 0.85, thereby demonstrating excellent repeatability.

Assessment of efficacy

Each test session comprised two efficacy assessments, carried out on all scorable teeth except the third molars. Six sites per tooth were assessed, three on the facial surfaces (buccal, mesial and distal) and three on the palatal/lingual surface (palatal/lingual, mesial and distal).

The gingival condition was assessed using the GI [], with the following scoring criteria: 0 = Absence of inflammation; 1 = Mild inflammation - slight change in colour and little change in texture; 2 = Moderate inflammation – moderate glazing, redness, oedema, and hypertrophy (bleeding on pressure); 3 = Severe inflammation - marked redness and hypertrophy (tendency to spontaneous bleeding).

Supragingival plaque was disclosed by Red-cote and assessed using the MQHPI [], scored as follows: 0 = No plaque; 1 = Separate flecks of plaque at the cervical margin of the tooth; 2 = A thin continuous band of plaque (up to 1 mm) at the cervical margin of the tooth; 3 = A band of plaque wider than 1 mm but covering less than 1/3 of the crown of the tooth; 4 = Plaque covering at least 1/3 but less than 2/3 of the crown of the tooth; 5 = Plaque covering 2/3 or more of the crown of the tooth.

For both GI and MQHPI, the whole mouth average per participant was calculated from the sum of all tooth site scores divided by the total number of measured sites.

Statistical analyses

The sample size was calculated based on a previous clinical study evaluating the same test toothpaste []. Assuming a standard deviation of 0.5 for GI, a sample size of 100 participants per group was deemed sufficient to detect a mean difference of 0.2 units on GI between the test and control groups, with a power of 80% and a significance level of 5%.

The analysis population was defined as all randomised participants who had at least one post-baseline efficacy assessment. Missing data were not imputed in the analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). ANCOVA model, with raw values as response, product and sex as fixed effects and baseline as covariate, was conducted for between toothpaste comparisons. The interaction effect for product and sex was significant for MQHPI, hence retained in the final model along with the fixed effects. However, no significant effect was observed for GI, so the interaction was excluded from the final model. Within toothpaste comparisons for each post baseline timepoint were tested using paired t-test.

A post-hoc analysis was performed to derive non-bleeding sites from GI data as following: GI Score (0,1) = 0 (non-bleeding site); GI Score (2, 3) = 1 (bleeding site). Percentage of sites with no bleeding at each timepoint was calculated. Participant level data (percentage of site with no bleeding i.e. P) was transformed into logit as following: Logit = log((P + 0.05)/(100.05-P)). Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) model was performed for product comparison with logit transformed values as response, product and sex as fixed effects and baseline as covariate.

All tests were two-sided and performed at the 5% significance level.

Results

A total of 251 participants (test 127/control 124) were randomised to study toothpaste with 198 participants (test 106/control 92) completing 26-week product use phase. Fifty-three participants (test 21/control 32) withdrew during the study (Fig., Consort Flow Diagram). Sixteen participants’ baseline data (test 5/control 11) were excluded from the analysis as they had no post baseline efficacy assessment. All participants included in the analysis were analysed according to the group they were originally assigned.

There were no product related adverse events (AEs) reported during the study. Mild AEs associated with the common cold were observed in ten participants from the control group and four participants from the test group. One participant in the control group reported serious adverse event (SAE) due to hospitalisation for gastroenteritis. All AEs and the SAE were resolved by study completion.

The demographic characteristics of randomised study population at baseline are described in the Table.

Table 2

Summary of age and sex for randomised participants

Number of participants

Age

Male

Female

Total

Mean (SD)

Range

Test

40

87

127

40.51 (12.98)

19–69

Control

37

87

124

43.02 (12.02)

21–67

Tableprovides a summary of the unadjusted mean values for GI and MQHPI at baseline, 4-week and 13-week timepoints, plus the baseline adjusted means for the between product comparison at each timepoint. There were no statistically significant differences between groups at baseline for both GI and MQHPI. Both test and control toothpastes showed significant reductions in GI and MQHPI compared to baseline, after 4, 13 and 26 weeks of product use (< 0.05 for all, Table). Relative to control toothpaste, test toothpaste exhibited a significant reduction in GI after 4, 13 and 26 weeks of product use (< 0.0001 for all, Table). There was also a statistically significantly greater reduction in MQHPI for test toothpaste compared with control toothpaste after 4, 13 and 26 weeks of product use (< 0.0001 for all, Table).

Table 3

Results on GI and MQHPI assessment

Timepoint

Group

N

GI

MQHPI

Mean (SD)

Estimate of Change from Baseline(95% CI)

Estimate of Between ProductComparison(95% CI)

Mean (SD)

Estimate of Change from Baseline (95% CI)

Estimate of Between Product Comparison(95% CI)

Baseline

Test

122

1.71 (0.36)

/

4.12 (0.41)

/

Control

113

1.69 (0.40)

4.13 (0.44)

Week 4

Test

122

1.42 (0.19)

−0.29 (−0.35, −0.24)

−0.18 (−0.23, −0.12)

3.73 (0.29)

−0.39 (−0.46, −0.32)

−0.29 (−0.38, −0.21)

Control

113

1.58 (0.41)

−0.11 (−0.15, −0.07)

3.99 (0.42)

−0.15 (−0.21, −0.08)

Week 13

Test

109

1.15 (0.09)

−0.55 (−0.62, −0.48)

−0.16 (−0.20, −0.11)

3.25 (0.25)

−0.86 (−0.94, −0.77)

−0.35 (−0.45, −0.25)

Control

97

1.31 (0.23)

−0.37 (−0.44, −0.30)

3.54 (0.41)

−0.56 (−0.66, −0.47)

Week 26

Test

106

1.06 (0.11)

−0.64 (−0.71, −0.56)

−0.53 (−0.60, −0.46)

2.85 (0.31)

−1.25 (−1.34, −1.16)

−0.96 (−1.06, −0.85)

Control

92

1.59 (0.38)

−0.09 (−0.17, −0.02)

3.77 (0.40)

−0.34 (−0.45, −0.22)

Between product comparison was Test minus Control group, a negative difference favours the Test group

Number of participants,Standard Deviation,Confidence Interval

<0.0001,<0.05. [value of within product comparison from paired t-test and between product comparison from ANCOVA comparison of baseline-adjusted means]

Figuredisplays the percentage of gingival sites that were non-bleeding at each timepoint for both test and control toothpastes. At baseline, participants on the test toothpaste had on average 35.7% non-bleeding sites in the mouth. This increased to 59.0% after 4 weeks, 84.8% after 13 weeks, and 93.8% after 26 weeks. The between product comparison showed that participants on the test toothpaste had significantly higher percentages of non-bleeding sites than control toothpaste at all three timepoints (< 0.01).

Fig. 2

Percentage of gingival sites considered non-bleeding (gingival index score of 0 or 1) at each timepoint. At 6 months 93.8% of sites in the test toothpaste group were non-bleeding as compared to 45.3% in the control toothpaste group

Discussion

This double-blind, randomised, clinical study provides further evidence that the enzyme and protein containing toothpaste provides gingival health benefits to those who suffer from mild to moderate gingival problems. The test toothpaste showed significant improvements in gingival condition and reductions in supragingival plaque from 4 weeks, with benefits increasing over the 26-week time frame of the study.

After 6 months of using the test toothpaste twice daily, the percentage of non-bleeding tooth sites (gingival index 0 or 1) increased from 35.7% at baseline to over 93%, which is significantly higher than the 45.3% achieved with the control toothpaste. An exploratory subgroup analysis was conducted by evaluating the proportion of participants moving between gingival health severity categories, defined by the percentage of bleeding sites (gingival index of 2 or 3) at participant level (< 10% = healthy, 10%−30% = localised gingivitis, and > 30% = generalised gingivitis). This classification system for gingival health has been previously published []. In this study, the proportion of participants in the test toothpaste group with < 10% bleeding sites (i.e. healthy population) increased markedly from 0.8% at baseline to 78.3% at Week 26. In contrast, the control toothpaste group showed a smaller increase from 1.8% to 16.3% over the same period. These findings reflect a meaningful shift in gingival health status among participants using enzyme and protein containing toothpaste.

It is of note that statistically significant improvements from baseline were also observed with the control toothpaste for both gingival condition and supragingival plaque levels. At each test visit, participants were required to brush teeth on site as per instruction, which likely influenced tooth brushing behaviour, thereby enhancing plaque control and contributing to improvement of gingival condition during participation. It is speculated that the 3-month interval between brushing instruction given at week 13 and the last examination at week 26 reduced the impact of this instruction. Consequently, participants might have returned to their normal tooth brushing behaviour, as shown by the fact the gingival condition and plaque levels for the control toothpaste at 26 weeks were worse than those at 13 weeks. Importantly, the effect of the test toothpaste on improving gingival health was evident and superior to the negative control, over and above the effect of the brushing instructions.

The gingival health efficacy of this enzyme and protein containing toothpaste has previously been evaluated in a double-blind, randomised clinical study in a UK population []. The toothpaste also reduced gingival inflammation, gingival bleeding and plaque levels in this study over the 13-week test phase as compared to negative control toothpaste []. Additionally, an epidemiological study carried out in Denmark showed lower levels of gingival inflammation, gingival bleeding and plaque in those who had used the toothpaste containing enzymes and proteins for at least 12 months as compared to those who had been using toothpastes without antimicrobial actives for a similar period []. Taken together, the results from the double-blind, randomised clinical studies and the real-world epidemiology study provide strong evidence that the gingival health benefits of the enzyme and protein containing toothpaste are robust and are generalisable to all individuals who suffer from mild to moderate gingival problem.

One area where the current and UK studies differ is in the performance of the control toothpaste. In the current study, the control toothpaste showed significant improvements in gingival health and plaque measures compared to baseline at all time points, whereas in the UK study, gingival and plaque scores increased from baseline []. The design of the studies differed, with participants in the UK study having a professional prophylaxis and using the control toothpaste for 4 weeks before the baseline assessments, while participants in current study started using the study toothpastes immediately without any prior prophylaxis and run-in phase []. The UK design was employed to try and reduce the Hawthorne effect, whereby the gingival health of those using the control toothpaste improves due to participants improving their brushing technique as a result of participating in the study [,]. A comparison between control toothpaste data from the two studies would indicate that the approach used in the UK study had the desired effect of reducing the Hawthorne effect while still demonstrating the benefit of the enzyme and protein containing toothpaste [].

The test toothpaste incorporates a three enzyme system designed to naturally augment saliva’s natural defence systems. Amyloglucosidase and glucose oxidase combine to generate hydrogen peroxide from polyglucans, and then hydrogen peroxide is utilised by lactoperoxidase to convert salivary thiocyanate into hypothiocyanite [,]. Both hydrogen peroxide and hypothiocyanite are known for their antimicrobial action and have been demonstrated to inhibit bacteria involved in periodontitis [,,]. This proposed mode of action has been supported through a series of in vitro studies which demonstrated that the test toothpaste increased levels of hypothiocyanite and hydrogen peroxide in saliva and provided antimicrobial effects in both single species and multispecies biofilm models []. Furthermore, twice daily brushing with the test toothpaste for 14 weeks was shown in a previous clinical study to shift the oral microbiome towards health []. This shift resulted from increases in relative abundance of bacteria associated with gingival health, such as, and decreases in relative abundance of periodontitis related species such as[].

Dental plaque is the main trigger of gingivitis []. If left untreated, gingivitis can advance to periodontitis, which not only affects oral health but also has broader systemic implications [–]. Maintaining proper oral hygiene is essential for preventing and managing gingivitis by minimising plaque build-up []. The enzyme and protein containing toothpaste demonstrates the ability to reduce gingival inflammation, both through reducing levels of dental plaque in the mouth and encouraging a healthier plaque microbiome. Hence, it has the potential to prevent gingivitis, retaining a strong connection between the gingival and tooth, and helping to prevent the concomitant progression to periodontitis.

In this study, there was a numerical difference in the number of participants who completed the study between the test group (= 106) and the control group (= 92). Although the control group experienced more dropouts, the reasons for discontinuation were comparable between groups, and primarily related to non-product related factors, including time conflict, non-product related AE and protocol deviations. These observations suggest that the variation in completion rates was likely due to random variation and is unlikely to have influenced the validity of between-group comparisons.

Stratified randomisation by sex was employed to minimize the risk of sex-related bias in between-group comparisons. However, the actual recruitment resulted in an imbalanced sex distribution, with approximately 70% female and 30% male participants, which could be considered a limitation of the study. The overall ANCOVA model for GI showed neither sex, nor product by sex interaction, to be significant at any timepoint supporting the generalisability of GI findings across sexes. While for MQHPI, a statistically significant product by sex interaction was observed at week 4 and 13, but not at week 26, while sex alone was not significant at any timepoint basis the overall model. Importantly, the product by sex analysis showed that there was no significant difference in the antiplaque efficacy of the test product between male and female participants. The significance of the product by sex interaction in the overall model was driven by greater plaque reductions with the control toothpaste in females than in males at the week 4 and 13. Hence, these findings suggest that the sex imbalance did not impact the study conclusions and that the gingival health benefits of the test product are similar in males and females.

Conclusion

In conclusion, this study demonstrated that brushing with toothpaste containing natural enzymes and proteins can significantly improve gingival health and reduce supragingival plaque levels among Chinese adult population with gingival problems, compared to control fluoride toothpaste.