PMID: 24502689
DOI: 10.1111/clr.12344
Title: A systematic review on the innervation of peri-implant tissues with special emphasis on the influence of implant placement and loading protocols.
Authors: Huang Y, Jacobs R, Van Dessel J, Bornstein MM, Lambrichts I, Politis C
Year: 2014
Journal: Clinical Oral Implants Research, 26(7):737-46

ABSTRACT:

To systematically review the available literature on the influence of dental implant placement and loading protocols on peri-implant innervation.

MEDLINE, Cochrane, EMBASE, Web of Science, LILACS, OpenGrey and hand searching were used to identify studies published up to July 2013. PEO search strategy focusing on: Is there, and if so, what is the effect of time between tooth extraction and implant placement or implant loading on neural fibre content in peri-implant hard and soft tissues?

Of 683 titles retrieved, only 10 articles fulfilled inclusion criteria: five evaluating innervation of peri-implant epithelium, five evaluating sensory function in peri-implant bone. Three studies were medium quality, rest were low quality. All studies reported sensory innervation around osseointegrated implants in bone-implant interface or peri-implant epithelium, with a particular innervation pattern. Compared to unloaded implants or extraction sites without implantation, a significantly higher density of nerve fibres around loaded dental implants was confirmed.

Conclusions: Published literature describes peri-implant innervation with a distinct pattern in hard and soft tissues. Implant loading seems to increase the density of nerve fibres in peri-implant tissues, with insufficient evidence to distinguish between innervation patterns following immediate and delayed implant placement and loading protocols. High risk of bias, variability in study design and loading protocols contributes to inconsistency — need for more RCTs, longer observation periods, standardized protocols.

Keywords: dental implants, immediate implant placement, immediate loading, innervation, osseoperception, systematic review
