Title: The Role of the Oral Microbiome in the Development of Diseases
Authors: Kozak M, Pawlik A.
Journal: Int J Mol Sci. 2023;24(6):5231
DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065231
PMID: 36982305
PMCID: PMC10048844
Source: PubMed Central full text (retrieved via PubMed MCP get_full_text_article)

ABSTRACT

Periodontal disease (PD) is a complex and infectious illness that begins with a disruption of bacterial homeostasis. This disease induces a host inflammatory response, leading to damage of the soft and connective tooth-supporting tissues. Moreover, in advanced cases, it can contribute to tooth loss. The aetiological factors of PDs have been widely researched, but the pathogenesis of PD has still not been totally clarified. There are a number of factors that have an effect on the aetiology and pathogenesis of PD. It is purported that microbiological, genetic susceptibility and lifestyle can determine the development and severity of the disease. The human body's defence response to the accumulation of plaque and its enzymes is known to be a major factor for PD. The oral cavity is colonised by a characteristic and complex microbiota that grows as diverse biofilms on all mucosal and dental surfaces. The aim of this review was to provide the latest updates in the literature regarding still-existing problems with PD and to highlight the role of the oral microbiome in periodontal health and disease. Better awareness and knowledge of the causes of dysbiosis, environmental risk factors and periodontal therapy can reduce the growing worldwide prevalence of PDs. The promotion of good oral hygiene, limiting smoking, alcohol consumption and exposure to stress and comprehensive treatment to decrease the pathogenicity of oral biofilm can help reduce PD as well as other diseases. Evidence linking disorders of the oral microbiome to various systemic diseases has increased the understanding of the importance of the oral microbiome in regulating many processes in the human body and, thus, its impact on the development of many diseases.

FULL TEXT

1. Introduction

Periodontitis is one of the most common infectious diseases, which affects 10-50% of the global population, depending on its severity. Gingivitis is a mild and reversible form of periodontal disease (PD), and if not treated properly, this can progress to periodontitis. PD is a complex and infectious illness that begins with the disruption of bacterial homeostasis. This disease induces a host inflammatory response, leading to damage to the soft and connective tooth-supporting tissues. Moreover, in advanced cases, it can contribute to tooth loss. The aetiological factors of PDs have been widely researched, but the pathogenesis of PD has still not been totally clarified. There are a number of factors that have an effect on the aetiology and pathogenesis of PD. It is purported that microbiological, genetic susceptibility and lifestyle can determine the development and severity of the disease. The human body's defence response to the accumulation of plaque and its enzymes is known to be a major factor for PD. Microbial plaque is a biofilm that forms on the teeth and gingiva and is one of the crucial causes of PD. There are other individual risk factors contributing to PD such as obesity, poor oral hygiene, stress, a diet low in vitamins C and D and tobacco use. The interplay between cigarette smoking and PD has been analysed in numerous studies, suggesting that smoking is a significant environmental risk factor for PD. One component of cigarette smoke, nicotine, can be related to changing clinical aspects and development. Additionally, many studies noticed that PD has an impact on the progression of various systemic diseases such as osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and ischemic cardiomyopathy, all of which may aggravate the disease. Moreover, other studies revealed the opposite situation, showing that systemic disease can exacerbate PD. In addition, taking medications such as steroids, anti-epilepsy drugs and cancer therapy drugs can also increase PD. Susceptibility to this disorder is connected to the triggering of host antibacterial defence mechanisms. Numerous studies have indicated the association between genetic factors with PD. Cytokines and their genetic polymorphisms influence susceptibility to this disease and its severity. Nevertheless, Nibali et al. presented interesting results of their work, with the inheritance of periodontitis being assessed as OR 0.38 (95% CI, 0.34-0.43) in twin studies and OR 0.15 (95% CI, 0.06-0.24) in other family research. It was observed that changes in the oral microbiome composition naturally increase with age, which may be related to the greater susceptibility of the elderly to chronic periodontitis. Periodontal disorders intensify problems with chewing, the function of speech and aesthetics, which definitely worsen the quality of life.

A new model of the pathogenesis of periodontal disorders assumes that the disease involves a more diverse microflora associated with periodontitis than previously thought. The disease is caused by the synergy of multiple microbes and dysbiosis, which disrupt the ecologically balanced biofilm associated with periodontal homeostasis and are not the result of individual pathogens. Under healthy conditions, the oral microbiome exhibits a well-balanced, dynamic ecosystem. Dysbiosis of the oral microbiome means an imbalance in relative abundance or an impact on microbial species, which contribute to the disease development of susceptible patients.

2. Microbiome in the Oral Health

The term "microbiome" was created by Joshua Lederberg and refers to the community of symbiotic, commensal and pathogenic microorganisms. The composition and interactions of any microbiome contribute to overall health, being a key factor in oral health. The oral cavity is colonised by a characteristic and complex microbiota that grows as diverse biofilms on all mucosal and dental surfaces. There are more than 700 species of bacteria, fungi, viruses, archaeobacteria and protozoa in the oral cavity. Bacteria are the most well-researched microorganisms in the oral cavity, but only 57% of bacterial species in the oral cavity have been officially named. In health, oral microflora mainly consists of facultative anaerobic Gram-positive bacteria. The oral fungal microbiome (mycobiome) is a significant component of the oral microbiome. The genus Candida is present in about 25-75% of healthy individuals as a commensal organism. C. albicans is one of the most crucial, prevalent fungal species. Under certain, favourable conditions, Candida species, as opportunistic pathogens, can cause infections of the oral mucosa. The oral microbiota usually live in harmony with the host and provide important benefits that contribute to overall health. The microorganisms in oral biofilms do not exist as single cells but live in close proximity to one another. The microbial interactions can be synergistic or antagonistic. Moreover, the oral environment has an impact on the composition of the microbiome. If some changes in local conditions occur, they can influence interactions between microorganisms in the mouth and increase the risk of PD. The composition of the oral microbiome has been widely explored by using metagenomics and metatranscriptomics. Using these methods, Belstrom et al. observed the transcriptional activity of prevalent Streptococcus species under healthy conditions and periodontitis. The researchers discovered that the transcriptional activity of Streptococcus species was higher in health and reduced in PD. Of particular note, Streptococcus species are Gram-positive, aerobic to facultatively anaerobic bacteria that are part of the normal flora of the oral cavity. In health, new species of Streptococcus and Streptococcus salivarius, which have potential probiotic features, are associated with the treatment of miscellaneous oral diseases such as periodontal disorders, among others.

Recently, there has been growing interest in the use of probiotics to treat PDs. Probiotics are defined as "living microorganisms that can have a beneficial effect on the host when taken in sufficient doses". Their function is to regulate host immune function, restore balance and maintain homeostasis in the mouth. Good results of probiotics in improving oral health have been noticed not only in periodontal disorders but also in dental caries, Candida infection and halitosis. The genus Lactobacillus is well known as a health-promoting probiotic in periodontal therapy. Bifidobacterium and Streptococcus salivarius are also known probiotics, which play a positive role in oral care. Other species also have a good impact on the oral cavity. In addition, some strains of bacteria isolated from the oral cavity have been produced commercially as probiotics. Kawai et al. suggested that Lactobacillus salivarius ALAL020 may be a future probiotic candidate. This bacterium produces a cyclic dipeptide with antibacterial activity against periodontal pathogens. Currently, the beneficial effects of synbiotics on health are of great interest to scientific research. Synbiotics are defined as "a mixture comprising live microorganisms and substrate(s) selectively utilized by host microorganisms that confers a health benefit on the host". It has been observed that administering a synbiotic in combination with probiotics can help prevent and treat certain metabolic disorders. However, there is little evidence for this. Duraisamy et al. noticed that synbiotics can diminish pathogen levels in children's saliva but are less effective compared to probiotics.

3. Oral Microbiome in Periodontal Diseases

The triad of oral anaerobic bacteria, the so-called "red complex" (Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia, Treponema denticola), have historically been considered as the basic infectious organisms associated with periodontitis. However, this has been identified in culture-based studies, and many of the wide variety of bacteria present in samples were overlooked. Nevertheless, only a few bacteria were confirmed to initiate and progress PDs. In addition, Candida albicans is one of the most crucial fungal residents of the oral microbiome. This commensal coloniser protects P. gingivalis from being recognised by the host's immune cells and can contribute to bacterial infections of the gums. Contemporary periodontology concentrates not only on the pathogenicity of dental plaque but also on the interplay between oral microorganisms and the host. Microflora perturbances then lead to gingivitis and, eventually, periodontitis. Factors such as the availability of oxygen, nutrients and changes in pH may contribute to disorders in homeostasis in the oral cavity as well as systemic diseases. Modification in the oral microbiome can lead to the expansion of microorganisms and provides excellent conditions for the growth of opportunistic microbes. In addition, perturbations in the periodontal microbiota are associated with an alteration from a symbiotic to dysbiotic microbial community. The symbiotic structure includes facultative bacteria, which then shifts to mainly anaerobic types. The transition of microbial composition precedes the clinical symptoms of PD. It is widely known that factors such as residing microorganisms, age, general health, lifestyle, and nutritional status have an impact on oral health.

In approximately 90% of cases of PD, halitosis (malodour) can be noticed in the mouth. Halitosis is mainly caused by the same species that have been associated with PD. The process of bacterial degradation of sulphur-containing amino acids into volatile gases leads to oral malodour. Moreover, poor oral hygiene, bacterial coating of the tongue and periodontal disorders such as gingivitis, periodontitis and caries can contribute to halitosis. Malodour can also be affected by dietary habits, such as smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity, diabetes, stress and advanced age. In addition, risk factors such as age and tooth decay can also lead to malodour in children. A noteworthy finding observed by Wu et al. is that the oral microbiome was altered, and more abundant species were present among obese people suffering from malodour compared to healthy persons. Tobacco use has a similar effect and may also alter the diversity of the oral microflora. Yitzhaki et al. observed the relationships between patients wearing dentures and halitosis, noticing higher bacterial diversity in the oral microflora among patients with halitosis wearing dentures. Zhang et al. suggested that halitosis can be detected long before clinical symptoms appear as a result of changes in the microbiome of the tongue coating. Although periodontitis is associated with a variety of microorganisms, P. gingivalis is a known, predominant periodontal pathogen that can influence other bacteria and form an inflammatory microenvironment. Kang et al. explored and identified strains of Weissella cibaria from human saliva that produce hydrogen peroxides and can inhibit volatile sulphur compounds formed by Fusobacterium nucleatum. Suzuki et al. showed that Lactobacillus salivarius buccal tablets can specifically reduce the amount of periodontal pathogens in patients with halitosis.

Subgingival communities of microbes, including fungi, archaea and viruses, can lead to periodontitis-related dysbiosis. The microbial communities are responsible for the pathological processes that have an impact on the periodontium. Periodontal health is frequently defined as opposite to PD, in the absence of any clinical symptoms of disorder. The development of the oral microflora is known to involve interactions between the host's genetics and the host's immune system, and changes in the composition of the microbiome depend on exposure to environmental factors.

During periodontal health, the health-associated species dominate the local microbiome. The development of gingivitis or PD is associated with increased biomass and the appearance of pathogenic species. The further progression of the disease is characterized by a shift in the microbiome balance into PD-associated pathogens. Alterations in composition and species diversity may lead to the identification of potential biomarkers in the diagnosis of PDs. In addition, biomarkers in saliva may reflect various conditions in the oral cavity connected with periodontitis. For example, nitric oxide (NO) is known as a biological marker, which is related to the aetiopathogenesis of oral diseases. Reher et al. observed increased levels of NO in patients with periodontal disorders in comparison to healthy people, correlated with periodontitis severity.

4. Oral Microbiome in Systemic Diseases

Under different conditions, bacterial flora has the ability to change the balance between health and sickness, both locally and systemically. The oral cavity is the entry point and direct way to the lungs and the digestive system, so the microbiomes of these structures are interconnected across the human body. That explains why the oral microbiome is associated with many systemic diseases. Homeostasis disorders due to food habits and poor oral hygiene not only lead to oral diseases such as caries or periodontal problems but also to other systemic diseases and cancers. The direct route and good access of the oral microbiome to the respiratory system explain the link between oral disorders and lung diseases, such as respiratory tract infection, bacterial pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and cystic fibrosis.

Previous studies have shown that disturbances in the oral microbiome can lead to abnormalities in the airway microbiome, which can cause an abnormal local immune response and chronic inflammation in the airways and the onset of COPD. In COPD, there is a higher incidence of bacterial colonization by potential respiratory pathogens. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important pathogen in cystic fibrosis patients; Streptococcus species could modulate the production of its virulence factors (elastase and pyocyanin) in vitro, and Streptococcus can also inhibit its pathogenicity through the production of hydrogen peroxide.

Furthermore, Haran et al. presented findings that the dysbiosis of the oral microbiome may affect the duration of COVID-19 symptoms. Certain species have been found in abundance in COVID-19 patients and are considered to produce proteins that can contribute to SARS-CoV-2 infection and may aggravate COVID-19.

Studies in recent years have shown that bacteria produce a number of compounds that cause the development of systemic inflammatory responses that impair the blood-brain barrier (BBB), exacerbating neuroinflammation and ultimately neurodegeneration. The microbiota produces a number of neuromediators such as serotonin, kynurenine, melatonin, GABA, tryptophan, catecholamines, histamine and acetylcholine. Abnormalities in the serotonin and kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism have been detected in patients with neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Other metabolites produced by the microbiota that can affect brain function and blood-brain barrier permeability are short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs): acetate, butyrate and propionate. LPS and amyloids secreted by bacteria are involved in the process of neurodegeneration. Bacterial and brain amyloids are biologically similar in structure, composition and physicochemical characteristics. Both bacterial amyloid proteins and LPS are potent activators of the chronic inflammation in the cerebral rim observed in AD patients. Dominy et al. observed a correlation between P. gingivalis and the progression of Alzheimer's disease; the presence of this bacterium was noticed in the brain of AD patients, and P. gingivalis produces neurotoxic gingipain proteases that inhibit tau function (a hallmark of AD), suggesting gingipain inhibitors could be used to treat neurodegeneration in AD.

The potential impact of periodontal infection on cardiovascular diseases has been the subject of much research. It has been shown that a number of compounds produced by the microbiome can enhance the development of atherosclerotic lesions in the vessels. Such compounds include trimethylamine (TMA), which is oxidized by monooxygenase to TMAO (trimethylamine N-oxide). TMAO enhances foam cell formation and increases VCAM-1 expression, which enhances monocyte adhesion to the endothelium. There is also activation of the protein kinase C (PKC) and nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) pathway, which disrupts endothelial cell function and results in the development of atherosclerotic lesions. LPS present on the cell membrane of bacteria can also bind to toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) on the surface of immunocompetent cells and induce the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF, IL-6), leading to the development of inflammation in the vessels and the formation of atherosclerotic plaque.

In addition, the microbiome has been shown to affect lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. SCFAs can modulate pancreatic beta-cell function and insulin production, contributing to the development of diabetes. Products of the microbiome can also cause disturbances in bile acid circulation. Microbiome dysbiosis may also stimulate chronic systemic inflammation and enhance oxidative stress, leading to insulin resistance and the development of diabetes. Xiao et al. presented the interplay between the oral microbiome, diabetes and PDs, observing that the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-17 is associated with periodontitis and that its inhibition has an impact on the pathogenicity of the diabetic microbiome; diabetes exacerbates periodontitis, while periodontitis causes a pathogenic alteration in the microbiome.

Recent studies have shown that periodontal disease is correlated with an increased risk of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in humans and in mouse models of arthritis. One of the environmental factors involved in the development of RA has been shown to be the microbiome. It has been shown that the severity of periodontal disease correlates with the activity of the disease process in RA patients and that treating the symptoms of periodontal disease results in the alleviation of RA symptoms. P. gingivalis can induce the formation of anti-CCP antibodies in RA patients and can enhance the production of IL-17, a cytokine that plays an important role in the development of inflammation in RA; P. gingivalis was also found to enhance the formation of Th17 cells involved in the pathogenesis of RA. Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans is another bacterium thought to be associated with the pathogenesis of RA, shown to induce the formation of citrullinated autoantigens. Konig et al. showed that leukotoxin-A produced by A. actinomycetemcomitans enhances hypercitrullination in neutrophils, an important element in the development of a pathological immune response in RA.

The oral microbiome plays a significant role not only in maintaining oral health but also in maintaining balance throughout the body. Many studies presented findings showing that the dysbiosis of oral microbiota may also contribute to the development of cancers. Farrell et al. noticed reduced levels of certain species in the salivary microbiome in patients with pancreatic cancer compared to healthy individuals, while levels of another species were significantly higher in patients with pancreatic cancer. Previous studies have also shown that the dysbiosis of the oral microbiome may be involved in the development of colorectal cancer through dysfunction in the gut epithelial barrier, increased intestinal permeability, increased synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, increased cellular proliferation, as well as changes in beta-catenin and Wnt signalling, leading to enhanced carcinogenesis.

5. Conclusions

Previous studies highlight the role of the oral microbiome in periodontal health and disease. Greater awareness and knowledge of the causes of dysbiosis, environmental risk factors and periodontal therapy can reduce the increasing prevalence of PD worldwide. The promotion of proper oral hygiene, a reduction in smoking, alcohol consumption and exposure to stress and comprehensive treatment to reduce the pathogenicity of the oral biofilm can help reduce the incidence of PD. Recent research on the human microbiome has led to increased interest in the oral microbiome and its impact on the normal course of oral processes and the development of disease states, including many systemic diseases. Evidence linking the relationship between disorders of the oral microbiome and various systemic diseases has increased awareness of the importance of the oral microbiome in regulating numerous processes in the human body and, thus, its impact on the development of many diseases. Full knowledge of the role of the oral microbiome in health and the development of disease processes can contribute to the prevention and treatment of diseases.
