Title: Fremanezumab—A Humanized Monoclonal Anti-CGRP Antibody—Inhibits Thinly Myelinated (Aδ) But Not Unmyelinated (C) Meningeal Nociceptors

Authors: Melo-Carrillo A, Strassman AM, Nir RR, Schain AJ, Noseda R, Stratton J, Burstein R
Journal: The Journal of Neuroscience, 2017 Nov 1;37(44):10587-10596
PMID: 28972120
PMCID: PMC5666582
DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2211-17.2017

[NOTE: PMC full-text body was returned empty by the PubMed MCP get_full_text_article tool
for this PMCID (known PMC-empty-fulltext behavior for some J Neurosci articles). Only the
structured abstract below was retrievable. full_text: false in the wiki frontmatter reflects this.]

ABSTRACT:

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), the most abundant neuropeptide in primary afferent
sensory neurons, is strongly implicated in the pathophysiology of migraine headache, but its
role in migraine is still equivocal. As a new approach to migraine treatment, humanized
anti-CGRP monoclonal antibodies (CGRP-mAbs) were developed to reduce the availability of CGRP,
and were found effective in reducing the frequency of chronic and episodic migraine. We
recently tested the effect of fremanezumab (TEV-48125), a CGRP-mAb, on the activity of
second-order trigeminovascular dorsal horn neurons that receive peripheral input from the
cranial dura, and found a selective inhibition of high-threshold but not wide-dynamic range
class of neurons. To investigate the basis for this selective inhibitory effect, and further
explore the mechanism of action of CGRP-mAbs, we tested the effect of fremanezumab on the
cortical spreading depression-evoked activation of mechanosensitive primary afferent
meningeal nociceptors that innervate the cranial dura, using single-unit recording in the
trigeminal ganglion of anesthetized male rats. Fremanezumab pretreatment selectively
inhibited the responsiveness of Aδ neurons, but not C-fiber neurons, as reflected in a
decrease in the percentage of neurons that showed activation by cortical spreading depression.
These findings identify Aδ meningeal nociceptors as a likely site of action of fremanezumab
in the prevention of headache. The selectivity in its peripheral inhibitory action may partly
account for fremanezumab's selective inhibition of high-threshold, as a result of a
predominant A-δ input to high-threshold neurons, but not wide dynamic-range dorsal horn
neurons, and why it may not be effective in all migraine patients.

Recently, we reported that humanized CGRP monoclonal antibodies (CGRP-mAbs) prevent
activation and sensitization of high-threshold (HT) but not wide-dynamic range
trigeminovascular neurons by cortical spreading depression (CSD). In the current paper, we
report that CGRP-mAbs prevent the activation of Aδ but not C-type meningeal nociceptors by
CSD. This is the first identification of an anti-migraine drug that appears to be selective
for Aδ-fibers (peripherally) and HT neurons (centrally). As the main CGRP-mAb site of action
appears to be situated outside the brain, we conclude that the initiation of the headache
phase of migraine depends on activation of meningeal nociceptors, and that for selected
patients, activation of the Aδ-HT pain pathway may be sufficient for the generation of
headache perception.

Attribution: According to PubMed, this abstract is from Melo-Carrillo A et al., J Neurosci
2017. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2211-17.2017
