Oral Health and Its Aetiological Role in Behçet's Disease

Mumcu G, Fortune F. Frontiers in Medicine (Lausanne). 2021 May 20;8:613419.
DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.613419 | PMID: 34095159 | PMCID: PMC8172597

Abstract

Behçet's disease (BD) is a chronic multi-systemic inflammatory disorder characterised by oro-genital ulcers, cutaneous manifestations, ocular, vascular, neurologic and gastrointestinal involvement. Complex interactions operating on the genetic background e.g. (HLA51), of infectious and other environmental agents, together with immune dysregulation impacts on the pathogenesis of BD. This suggests that the environmental factors triggering immune responses may activate clinical manifestations in genetically susceptible individuals. Since oral health forms the basis of all general health both dental and systemic, it is an important component of both Dentistry and Medicine. Oral ulcers are the most common clinical manifestation of oral mucosal health. Changes in the oral environment consequently acts as an infective and immune trigger. In this review, complex interactions between the oral ulcers, the oral microbiome and immune responses together with the course of oral and systemic disease manifestations in BD are discussed in the context of the aetiologic role of oral health.

Introduction

Behçet's disease (BD) is a chronic multi-systemic inflammatory disorder characterised by mucocutaneous manifestations and involvement of musculoskeletal, vascular, ocular, central nervous and gastrointestinal systems. Oral ulcer is the most common and usually initial symptom of the disease. Recurrent exacerbations as well as remissions with unpredictable clinical manifestations are the hallmark of BD. Genetic susceptibility (HLA-B51), infectious agents (bacteria and viruses e.g. Streptococcus spp., Herpes simplex virus), hormones and immune dysregulation are implicated in the aetiopathogenesis of BD. Infections may play a pivotal role in the initiation of the disease and relapses of clinical manifestations in genetically susceptible patients.

The higher prevalence of BD is present in Mediterranean and Middle East countries along with Ancient Silk Route. Environmental factors tend to be specific to geographic areas and reflect the interactions between genetic factors and infective organism with host factors in BD. Both epidemiologic and hospital-based studies were carried out to investigate the role of environmental factors in Turkish, African and Asian immigrants. The results show that the prevalence of BD is higher in immigrants compared to individuals living in the same country, while it is lower than that of their country origin. Furthermore, there has been a decrease in the prevalence of BD, with a milder clinical course in both the Japanese and Korean populations who have minimal ethnic diversity. These factors may be important pointers to understanding the impact of environmental factors in BD.

Oral Environment

Oral health is the bridge between Dentistry and Medicine, and consequently closely related to systemic health. The oral environment provides a dynamic ecosystem which includes mucosal surfaces, saliva, local and systemic immune system and species of bacteria, viruses and fungi, and the resulting complex interactions. The oral microorganisms are found on mucosal surfaces, saliva and biofilm around the tooth surface. This results in the oral mucosa being constantly exposed to antigenic stimulation with commensal and/or pathogenic oral microbial antigens. Comorbidities, diet and life style, ethnicity, medication including immune suppressive drugs, broad-spectrum antibiotics used for ulcers, polypharmacy affecting the salivary flow rate and oral health status (natural teeth vs. edentulous) all collectively may affect the microbiome ecosystem within the mouth.

Microorganisms play a critical role in maintaining the balance of health and disease as commensal microorganisms protect the mucosal barrier and prevent pathogenic colonisation. Although the oral mucosa is an effective physical barrier for microorganisms and their antigens, molecular mimicry and cross-reactivity between tissue antigens, microbial antigens and immune dysregulation can trigger oral ulcer activity in BD. Moreover, genetic factors also have a role in the occurrence of oral ulceration as shown by the overlapping genetic risk factors in patients with BD and Recurrent Aphthous Stomatitis (RAS) in genome wide association studies.

Oral Microbiome

Oral microorganisms can trigger the immune system and inflammatory pathways, contributing to the aetiopathogenesis of BD. Infective oral foci caused by oro-dental and periodontal disease are also part of the environmental factors affecting the pathogenesis of BD. Streptococcus strains are the main focus in the aetiology of BD; other organisms including human herpesvirus and other viruses are also thought to be aetiologic factors and contribute to the induction of oral ulceration in BD.

The relationships between Streptococcus infections and clinical observations may be summarised by high prevalence of tonsillitis and dental caries, and the activation of symptoms by dental treatment and bacterial plaque. Increases in the colonisation of Streptococcus sanguinis on tongue, dental plaque and buccal mucosa as well as Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus sanguinis within the dental plaque and saliva are observed in BD. There is a beneficial effect of antimicrobial treatment on both mucocutaneous and systemic manifestations.

Salivary Streptococcus mutans colonisation is the main aetiological factor for dental caries and is thought to be an important pathogen with increased colonisation in active oral ulceration in BD. Salivary S. mutans levels are found to be high in male patients who have a more severe disease course and worse periodontal indices. They also have decreased levels of serum mannose binding lectin (MBL <100 ng/ml), a host defence protein, with raised levels of S. mutans colonisation in saliva. The low serum MBL associated with oral infections and oral ulcer activity is an indication of dysregulated innate immunity and severe disease course.

There is an increase in Streptococcus sanguinis colonisation in the oral environment with uncommon serotypes which cross-react with epithelial cells. The adhesion of S. sanguinis to buccal epithelial cells is a critical activating factor in BD. Oral and ocular inflammation are also induced by S. sanguinis infection after heat trauma to the oral mucosa in a germ-free mice model. In BD, stimulation of peripheral blood T cells using KTH-1 (a crude extract of Streptococcus sanguinis) results in an increase of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ). Stimulated KTH-1 γδ T-cell lines secrete IL-8 and tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). These infective agents use molecular mimicry — microbial heat shock proteins share homology with human HSP-60 protein — to stimulate the human immune system and influence disease pathogenesis of BD.

Innate Immunity

Neutrophils as the first line defender against infections have important roles in the innate immunity of BD. The ulcers initiate recruitment of neutrophils to the site of increased activity. Chemotaxis, phagocytosis and superoxide production are increased in hyperactive neutrophils in BD. Elevated neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) production caused by neutrophil activation are seen in disease activity and contribute to vasculitis and thrombosis. Neutrophil elastase (NE) is enzymatically active in saliva and responsible for the majority of protease activity. The combination of Colchicine and Azathioprine, effective medications for the treatment of oral ulcers, helps regulate NE activity for oral ulcers in Behçet's patients. Serum S100 calcium-binding protein A12 (S100A12), constitutively expressed on neutrophils and secreted when neutrophils are activated, has inflammatory functions with potent chemotactic activity and contributes to BD pathogenesis.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and pathogen-recognition receptors (PRRs) play critical roles in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases. Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) from the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria is recognised by TLR and PRRs. The oral microbial community is recognised as a potential trigger of TLR2 and TLR4 in BD. BD patients with S. sanguinis and S. mutans have high serum levels of IgG anti-LTA antibody; LTA stimulates IL-8 production in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Saliva includes antibacterial, antiviral and antifungal properties arising from lysozyme, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, statherin, immunoglobulin A and mucin. Salivary human neutrophil defensin HNP-1–3 and S100 molecules are increased in BD patients with more severe disease, and salivary HNP 1–3 levels are associated with oral ulcer activity. The antimicrobial cathelicidin LL37, produced from mucosal epithelial cells and found in saliva, is associated with the number of oral ulcers. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is elevated in active oral ulcers, unlike epithelial growth factor and transforming growth factor-alpha, which are found to be low. An increase in salivary IL-1α levels is seen in BD compared to healthy controls, as well as elevated serum/salivary IL-6 levels.

Adaptive Immune Responses

Microorganisms accumulate at the mucosal surfaces and penetrate the epithelial barrier. Intraepithelial γδ T cells usually protect the mucosal barrier by producing antimicrobial peptides and activating mucosal immune responses. After pathogenic microorganisms are eliminated by neutrophils, the consequent bacterial products are recognised by γδ T cells that stimulate pro-inflammatory cytokines from monocytes. After innate immune responses are activated by pathogens, vasculitis and tissue damage result from neutrophil/T cell activation in BD. The Th17 axis influences cross-talk between lymphocytes and neutrophils in BD. Cytokeratin and adhesion molecule expression are upregulated in oral ulcers in BD, resulting in altered cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interaction.

Immunoglobulin G (IgG) responses to S. sanguinis are found to be low in BD patients compared to healthy controls; poor periodontal health is related to decreases in antibody responses in BD. IL-1 is implicated in the pathogenesis of both periodontitis and BD — IL-1alpha-889C allele levels are higher in BD than healthy controls, and poor periodontal health is associated with age, male gender and carrying the IL-1beta-511T allele in the Turkish population. BD severity may be affected by periodontitis-induced inflammatory response due to alteration in the IL-1 gene. Similarly, the TNF-alpha-1031T/C (CC genotype) polymorphism is higher in BD than in healthy controls, and disease severity is associated with poor periodontal health and this polymorphism.

Salivary Microbiome

Microbiome studies indicate that gut, oral or skin pathogens and their relationship with specific microbial communities affect disease activity, acting as both an aetiological trigger and a prognostic indicator. Dysbiosis of the established microbial community results in inflammation and decreased host pathogen resistance. Geographic area, genetic/ethnic factors, lifestyle, diet pattern, dentition and oral health are all associated with the composition and biodiversity of the host's microbiota.

The authors' saliva microbiome study shows that ulcer sites of BD are more highly colonised with certain taxa compared to those of RAS; increase in colonisation of other taxa is found in the non-ulcer area of BD and RAS. Certain taxa heavily colonise active oral ulcers in BD, while other taxa show increased colonisation in healthy controls. Another of the authors' studies found increases and decreases in specific taxa in the salivary microbiome in BD; interestingly, after dental and periodontal treatment, the salivary microbiome pattern stabilises to a more symbiotic pattern in the short term. Changes in microbiome profile modifying immune responses contribute to immune dysregulation during disease development and progression. Similarly, dysbiosis of the gut microbiota activates the inflammatory response in BD — decreased butyrate production (which maintains the commensal IgA mucosal barrier and promotes Regulatory T cell responses) is implicated, and faecal microbiota transplants in a mouse model cause activation of autoimmune uveitis with increased IL-17 and IFN-γ.

Oral Health and Disease Course

When the oral health of BD patients is evaluated, poor periodontal scores are observed, especially in males with more severe disease. Increased microbial plaque accumulation, gingival inflammation, periodontal tissue destruction and tooth loss are found in BD patients compared to healthy controls. Using regression analysis, elevated microbial plaque accumulation is associated with oral ulcer activity and male gender; increased plaque accumulation is a risk factor for a more severe disease course. These results were confirmed in a 5-year follow-up study using mediation analysis: increased disease severity score (reflecting global organ involvement) is directly associated with male gender. Tooth extraction may be necessary as a last resort in (male) patients with severe dental and advanced periodontal disease not amenable to treatment, acting as a mediator for elevated disease severity in BD.

Oral health status varies between countries — utilisation of oral and dental health services is affected by individual factors and local/national health policies. In the authors' previous study, the number of monthly oral ulcers, filled teeth, frequency of tooth brushing and dental visits were higher in patients from the UK compared with those in Turkey; a lower utilisation rate of dental services and lack of oral hygiene led to poorer oral health in patients from Turkey.

Elimination of oral infection foci by dental and periodontal treatment is an under-acknowledged option for control of both oral ulcer activity and systemic manifestations. In an intervention study, oral ulcer activity was recorded pre-treatment for one month; dental and periodontal treatment was carried out over a 1-month period in the intervention group while a control group was followed without treatment. Oral hygiene education was given to both groups and oral health evaluated by indices; systemic treatments were unchanged during the study. Oral ulcer activity initially increased in the treatment period owing to mechanical trauma and activation of systemic immune response, especially in the first 2 days. In contrast, the number of recurrent oral ulcers was significantly decreased at 6 months, with improvement of oral health in the intervention group compared to pre-treatment/treatment periods, and lower recurrent-ulcer counts than the control group. Although an early flare of oral ulcers is seen, the long-term outcome demonstrates that better oral hygiene is associated with decreased disease activity. Traumatic dental and/or prosthodontic restorations, including implants, may also trigger oral ulcers with consequent activation of BD.

Oral Ulcer and Treatment Protocols

Oral ulcers are a common clinical manifestation of BD, and oral ulcer activity may persist during the disease process; when the mucosal barrier is breached, dysbiosis results in microorganisms and inflammatory mediators being released into the general circulation, actively contributing to ongoing disease activity.

Regular oral hygiene and topical treatments are the preferred approach to reduce dysbiosis and stabilise the oral environment, encouraging ulcer healing and reduced disease activity. A new BD mouthwash (Triorasol) has a positive effect on the oral ulcer pattern and quality of life over 6 months' use — it reduces pain and clears ulcers within 10–14 days, should be continued short-term until ulcer cropping ceases, and reduces oral/oropharyngeal scarring commonly seen in BD. Its efficacy is found to be high compared to betamethasone mouthwash in BD. Immunosuppressive medications for elimination of oral ulcers in resistant mucocutaneous cases can improve outcomes in a multidisciplinary setting.

Antibiotics also have a place in ulcer control of mucocutaneous lesions, especially when there is an infectious (streptococcal) aetiology. Minocycline has a modest effect on oral ulcer activity, and decreases IL-1β/IL-6 responses from PBMCs stimulated with streptococcal antigen. Colchicine combined with prophylactic benzathine penicillin is more effective in reducing the frequency and duration of oral ulceration than colchicine alone.

Macrolides are another therapeutic option because of immunoregulatory and antimicrobial effects — they accumulate intracellularly and are transferred to inflammatory areas by neutrophils. Azithromycin decreased healing time and the number of oral ulcers; good oral hygiene also shortened healing time and microbial plaque accumulation. An increase in IL-10 responses of PBMCs after treatment (higher than pre-treatment levels) and suppression of intracellular IFN-gamma responses of PBMCs are seen — attributed to azithromycin's immunomodulatory effects. IL-10 is identified as a BD susceptibility locus in genome wide association studies.

Apremilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 blocker, controls oral ulcer activity and decreases oral ulcer-related pain in BD by modulating inflammatory pathways; elimination of oral ulcers starts within the first week of treatment.

Since poor oral health with ulceration and infective foci is implicated in the pathogenesis of BD, regular dental check-ups are important. From the patients' perspective, planning of dental visits could be affected by disease activity, oral ulcer related factors, or immunosuppressive treatments. Dental treatment should not be undertaken in BD patients with active disease, as they will experience exacerbation of BD symptoms which may be activated by dental treatment via mechanical trauma causing a break in the epithelium and exposing the circulation to the oral environment. Lack of infection control could also be seen in immunocompromised patients. Motivation for oral hygiene is fairly high in female BD patients with active oral ulcers. Individual factors (psychosocial factors, education, income, gender) and National Oral Health policies are all associated with an individual's oral health.

Promotion of Oral Health as an Aetiologic Factor in Behçet's Disease

As oral health policies and systems to deliver oral health care vary widely between countries, delivery of care may rely on an "out of pocket payment system" with minimal income to cover costs. Questions about the reason for the last dental visit (control vs. emergency care), infrequency of dental visits, lack of regular oral hygiene habits, and presence of pain/discomfort provide important indicators for physicians about oral health. Oral health education should be part of the BD clinic visit — patients should be motivated to engage in good hygiene practices and attend regular dental check-ups to shift from a treatment-oriented to a preventive-oriented pattern; recall periods should be varied according to individual risk factors.

Conclusion (paraphrased)

From the oral health perspective, a series of complex interactions are observed in the pathogenesis of BD. Since oral microorganisms have an important role in disease activation, elimination of infective foci and protection of oral health are fundamental to disease management. Close working relationships between oral and general physicians are crucial for the promotion of both oral and general health; achieving good oral health will greatly contribute to improved prognosis in BD.
