Saliva diagnostics: Salivaomics, saliva exosomics, and saliva liquid biopsy
Nonaka T, Wong DTW. J Am Dent Assoc. 2023. PMID 37500232. PMCID PMC11390004. DOI 10.1016/j.adaj.2023.05.006
Source: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11390004/ (PubMed Central full text)

ABSTRACT
Background. Each day, humans produce approximately 0.5 through 1.5 liters of saliva, a biofluid that is rich in biological omic constituents. Our lack of understanding how omic biomarkers migrate from diseased tissue to the saliva has impeded the clinical translation of saliva testing. Although such biomarkers must be conveyed via the vascular and lymphatic systems to the salivary glands, the molecular mechanisms that underlie this transport remain unclear. Although COVID-19 highlighted the need for rapid and reliable testing for infectious diseases, it represents only one of the many health conditions that potentially can be diagnosed using a saliva sample.
Types of Studies Reviewed. The authors discuss salivaomics, saliva exosomics, and the mechanisms on which saliva diagnostics are based and introduce a novel electrochemical sensing technology that may be exploited for saliva liquid biopsy.
Results. The utility of saliva for screening for lung cancer is under investigation. Saliva testing may be used to stratify patients, monitor treatment response, and detect disease recurrence. The authors also highlight the landscapes of saliva-based SARS-CoV-2 testing and ultrashort cell-free DNA and outline how these fields are likely to evolve in the near future.
Practical Implications. Breakthroughs in the study of saliva research, therefore, will facilitate clinical deployment of saliva-based testing.

FULL TEXT
Historically, many diseases have been diagnosed via detection of biomarkers in the blood. However, drawing blood causes patient discomfort and is not feasible in all settings. Saliva diagnostics could offer a less invasive and more reproducible alternative. Furthermore, routine saliva testing of at-risk patients may reduce cancer-associated mortality. For example, most head and neck cancers are only diagnosed via biopsy after the appearance of symptoms or a lump. The malignancy is generally advanced at this point, and this is associated with poor prognosis. Presymptomatic saliva testing would facilitate earlier treatment for patients with head and neck cancer and thereby improve patient outcomes. In support of this approach, a saliva-based molecular test was able to detect oral cancer earlier, and this led to improved prognosis.

However, the lack of basic mechanistic understanding of how disease-related biomarkers reach the saliva still limits the translation of saliva diagnostics from bench to bedside. Concerted efforts from the academic community and from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) are beginning to provide mechanistic insight into the systemic transport of biomarkers from peripheral tissues to the oral compartment. For example, a US-based consortium has generated a comprehensive catalog of the salivary proteome of healthy people, revealing that 20% through 30% of the salivary proteome overlaps with the plasma proteome. This observation, together with the close physical proximity of saliva and blood, suggests that many salivary constituents are derived from the blood. Furthermore, the NIH-led Rapid Accelerated Diagnostic (RADx) initiative has accelerated basic research into saliva diagnostics to provide rapid, accurate, and reproducible COVID testing via this method. Spurred on by such investments, the academic and industry sectors are working on 3 core elements of saliva-based diagnostics: salivaomics, saliva exosomics, and saliva liquid biopsy.

SALIVAOMICS
Salivaomics is defined as the integrative study of saliva and its constituents and functions, using omics technologies. High throughput methodologies enable researchers to identify DNA-, RNA-, protein-, and metabolite-based biomarkers via omic studies; they also facilitate the study of salivary microbiomes. It is challenging to identify subpopulations of clinically relevant biomarkers from the analysis of bulk saliva samples. Other elements in the oral cavity add biological noise to saliva samples: food and oral bacteria, and whether the sample is taken during rest or shortly after eating, when mastication can alter saliva composition. It is critical to prevent degradation of molecules in the saliva to maximize biomarker discovery. Protease inhibitors are required to block amylase-dependent degradation of protein biomarkers, whereas ribonuclease inhibitors must be added to ensure transcriptomic analyses are not compromised. The Extracellular RNA Communication Consortium (ERCC), an NIH initiative, profiles extracellular RNA (exRNA) from all bodily fluids, including saliva. Saliva exRNAs account for 2.5% (256/9,892) of all the RNA-seq data deposited in the exRNA Atlas.

SALIVA EXOSOMICS
Saliva exosomics analyzes the molecular cargos carried by small (30–100 nm diameter) membrane-enclosed extracellular structures called exosomes. Originating in the endosomal pathway and secreted by almost all cell types, exosomes move through the vasculature to distal sites, including the salivary glands. They are also found in blood, urine, breast milk, and cerebrospinal fluid. Exosomes modulate intercellular signaling and cellular homeostasis via transporting information-rich molecular cargos. As a specific subpopulation of salivary fluid, they are naturally enriched sources of biomarker information, free from many salivary contaminants. The lipid bilayer of exosomes acts as a natural barrier to proteases and ribonucleases that would otherwise degrade their contents, making exosomes an attractive source of diagnostic material. Exosomes have a well-documented role in cancer biology.

MECHANISTIC LINK BETWEEN SALIVARY EXOSOMES AND SYSTEMIC DISEASES
Cancer-derived exosomes are a rich source of information reflecting the genetic composition and status of their parent tumors. A murine orthotopic pancreatic cancer xenograft model showed that salivary exosomes can be exploited for cancer detection. Introduction of a dominant negative Rab11 GTPase in tumor cells prevented exosome biogenesis and removed tumor-derived messenger RNA signals from salivary samples — showing that cancer-derived mRNAs are the cargo of exosomes and likely reach the salivary gland via the circulation. In another study, human CD63-GFP-positive vesicles and human GAPDH were isolated from the saliva of mice harboring human lung cancer xenografts, confirming movement of vesicles from cancer cells to distal sites via the circulation. The pancreatic cancer model also showed cancer cell–derived exosomes are biologically active: transfer of saliva from tumor-bearing mice to control animals suppressed the activated natural killer cell markers CD69 and NKG2D, and dominant negative Rab11 GTPase reversed these effects.

SALIVA LIQUID BIOPSY
Early cancer detection improves prognosis. Liquid biopsy samples contain tumor-derived materials such as circulating tumor cell (CTC), circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), and circulating extracellular vesicle (EV). ctDNA harbors somatic mutations pathognomonic of certain human tumors; their identities guide targeted therapy selection, whereas the amount of ctDNA is proportional to disease burden. Multicancer early detection (MCED) tests contain probes for drivers of diverse cancer types, enabling simultaneous screening for more than 1 cancer. Electric field–induced release and measurement (EFIRM) is an electrochemical-based platform for rapid, noninvasive detection of molecular targets in body fluids. It uses nucleic acid probes that detect low-abundance targets (< 100 molecules) without prior extraction or amplification, specially modified electrodes that increase probe surface density, and an electric waveform to enhance incubation. EFIRM detects oncogenic mutations in the biofluids of patients with cancer. Mechanism: paired capture and detector probes specific for each mutant are designed; the capture probe is immobilized on the gold electrode via copolymerization with pyrrole in an electric field; a mixture of the clinical sample (plasma or saliva) and detector probe is transferred; a cyclic square-wave electric field creates a nonuniform field allowing ctDNA to be rapidly detected. Positive potential accumulates the gene target on the working electrode; negative potential removes weak nonspecific binders; continuous switching generates near-field solution mixing so only perfectly matched sequences hybridize. EFIRM can detect single nucleotide variants in complex biofluids rapidly (≈ 30 minutes, 40 µL volume). Clinical utility was shown 10 years ago when ctDNAs coding for actionable sensitizing EGFR mutations were detected in salivary samples from patients with lung cancer using EFIRM. Kim and colleagues showed quantification of salivary ctDNA could be used for treatment monitoring and prediction of recurrence in lung cancer: saliva-based EFIRM detected an increase in recurrence-related T790M ctDNA in 2 of 26 patients, whereas this signal was missed using digital droplet PCR and next-generation sequencing.

SALIVA-BASED SARS-CoV-2 TESTING
At the start of COVID-19, nasal swab testing became the standard. Irritation during nasal swabbing often induces sneezing, which can spread disease to nearby patients and health care workers. Saliva screening is much less invasive and does not provoke a strong patient reflex. Studies show the sensitivity of saliva at detecting SARS-CoV-2 compared with PCR-based nasal swabs. Saliva self-testing in schools/workplaces improved screening rates and earlier detection. The SalivaDirect test and the Spectrum Solutions SDNA-1000 test were submitted for FDA Emergency Use Authorization (EUA); UCLA created and deployed SwabSeq kits campuswide. The authors designed EFIRM tests capable of detecting viral antigen, host-neutralizing antibodies, and viral genomic RNA — a triplex test (50 µL sample) giving a 360° view of infectious state and immune response, outperforming EUA-approved tests for all 3 biomarkers.

ULTRASHORT CELL-FREE DNA: A NEW CELL-FREE DNA SUBTYPE
There are 2 distinct populations of cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Broad-range cfDNA sequencing uncovered a distinct population of ultrashort cell-free DNA (uscfDNA) in plasma, ranging 25–75 nucleotides (modal peak 50 nt), distinct from the typical 167 bp mononucleosomal cell-free DNA (mncfDNA). Discovery required a DNA extraction method optimized for short fragments paired with single-stranded library preparation; such fragments are missed by conventional sequencing. uscfDNA abundance is generally higher in healthy people than in patients with cancer and is thought to reflect open chromatin regions. uscfDNA fragments are optimal targets for EFIRM detection. uscfDNA pools have been detected in plasma; study of differences between plasma and saliva in health and disease may increase diagnostic power.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Fundamental biological discoveries have accelerated the application of salivaomics to the clinic. The redistribution of exosomes from diseased tissue to the saliva via the circulatory system provides a "canary in the coal mine" exploitable for diagnostics, patient stratification, and treatment monitoring. Interactions of salivary exosomes with the gut microbiome represent a new frontier. Three EFIRM-based assays have obtained Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) certification: EGFR L858R, exon 19del, and T790M in plasma; the same in saliva; and SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin G S1 in saliva. Commercial partnerships are required to advance the EFIRM tests. The synergy between basic and translational research is a key driver of regulatory approval.
