Position statement on longitudinal cracks and fractures of teeth
Patel S, Teng P-H, Liao W-C, Davis MC, Fidler A, Haupt F, Ordinola Zapata R, Bose R, Fabiani C.
International Endodontic Journal. 2025.
DOI: 10.1111/iej.14186 | PMID: 39840523 | PMCID: PMC11812625
Source: PubMed Central (full text)

ABSTRACT
This position statement is a consensus view of an expert committee convened by the European Society of Endodontology (ESE). The statement is based on current clinical and scientific evidence as well as the collective reflective practice of the committee. The aim is to provide clinicians with evidence-based, authoritative information on the aetiology, clinical presentation, and management of cracks and fractures that typically manifest along the long axis of the crown and/or root.

INTRODUCTION
The incidence of cracked teeth (CT) and vertical root fractures (VRF) is increasing. The term 'Longitudinal' encompasses cracks and fractures that are vertical in nature and may progress over time. If left untreated, CT may progress to irreversible pulpal disease and possibly tooth loss. A VRF commonly progresses subtly, leading to a delayed diagnosis that results in extraction. Timely identification and appropriate management are essential to increase the life span of the affected tooth.

TABLE 1 — Definitions of longitudinal cracks and fractures of teeth
- Craze Line: Superficial, coronal crack line confined to the enamel with no compromise of the integrity of the tooth.
- Cracked Tooth (CT): A crack extending into the dentine, of unknown depth or size, may extend subcrestally into the root. There may be pulpal involvement.
- Fractured (cracked) Cusp: (in)complete fracture extending down a bucco/lingual groove and mesio-distal direction of the affected cusp. Usually involve marginal ridges. +/- pulpal involvement.
- Split Tooth (ST): Complete, visible separation of the entire tooth into 2 parts, usually in a mesio-distal direction.
- Vertical root fracture (VRF): An incomplete longitudinal (axial) root fracture, involving the cementum, dentine, and root canal space.
- Split Root: A complete VRF with visible separation of the root into distinct segments.

CRACKED TEETH
Prevalence: The prevalence of coronal (visible) CT has been reported to be as high as 70% (Hilton et al.). Posterior teeth (maxillary (pre)molars and mandibular molars) are more commonly affected. Historically associated with restored teeth; over the last two decades increasing incidence in unrestored teeth. CT incidence increases with age and is most prevalent in patients over 40 years of age. Age-related changes in dentine (increasing mineral-to-collagen and cross-linking ratio) render radicular dentine less resilient and more susceptible to crack propagation. A significant increase in prevalence has been reported since the COVID-19 pandemic.

Aetiology: Multifactorial — occlusal interferences, tooth morphology, previous operative dentistry, increased masticatory loading due to hard food diets, and/or parafunctional habits. Apical propagation of a dentinal crack occurs over prolonged cyclical loading, which may result in microbial ingress into the pulp chamber, culminating in pulp necrosis.

Clinical features: A practice-based study of 2858 teeth from 209 dentists in the USA reported 45% of CT were symptomatic, the most common symptoms being pain to cold (37%), biting pain (16%), and spontaneous pain (11%) (Hilton et al.). Tenderness to percussion and marginal fracture lines also commonly reported. Diagnosis of early-stage CT can be challenging due to poorly localised symptoms. Clinical exam: sensibility tests, tooth mobility, surrounding soft tissues, occlusal assessment (wear facets, loss of canine guidance, occlusal interferences). Narrow periodontal probing of less than 6 mm is associated with CT, whereas probing depths of VRF are deeper. In vital teeth, detection aided by a bite test (e.g., Tooth Sleuth) — aim is to reproduce symptoms (sharp pain when biting, ceasing upon release). Removal of existing restorations facilitates visualisation. Fibre optic transillumination and/or stains (methylene blue) recommended. Dental operating microscope or loupes critical to detect dentinal cracks and distinguish from craze lines. Treatment of craze lines is not indicated except for aesthetic reasons (stained craze lines).

Radiographic features: Highly variable. Only 2% of CTs with vital pulps had evidence of a crack on a radiograph (Hilton et al.). Radicular extension may result in subtle crestal vertical bone loss associated with pulpal necrosis. CBCT may be indicated if clinical/PR assessments are inconclusive; CBCT is not predictable in detecting cracks but may reveal subtle crestal bone loss.

Management options:
- Clinically normal pulp and normal apical tissue: Shallow cracks / low risk of propagation may be periodically reviewed. Unclear how long asymptomatic untreated CT can remain stable (studies only monitored 1-3 years). Advise on parafunctional habits; manage occlusal interferences. Untreated CT in high-risk teeth (distal marginal ridge of last-standing premolars/molars, extensively restored, lone/last-standing tooth, chronic parafunction) may progress to fractured cusp or split tooth — active treatment indicated (e.g., cuspal coverage restoration).
- Reversible pulpitis: May be monitored or (in)completely traced out depending on extent and restored with composite or cuspal coverage restoration. Not always pragmatic to trace out entire crack. Decision tailored case-by-case. Factors indicating cuspal coverage: extent of crack, history of spontaneous pain, moderate/significant caries, existing direct restorations, pain on biting, volume of residual coronal tooth structure, proximal contacts, occlusal scheme, parafunctional habits. Single-stage (immediate definitive restoration) or multiple-stage (interim treatment + review) approach. No clear evidence on most suitable restorative approach. CT managed with direct bonded composite may be more likely to require RCT and/or further repair of fractured restorations than CT managed with cuspal coverage restorations. Reported incidence of endodontic intervention after restorative management: 7.7% to 20%.
- Irreversible pulpitis/pulp necrosis: Survival rate of root-filled CT ranges from 84% to 88% over 1-5 years follow-up; success rate 76% to 82% after 1-2 years. A 5+ mm periodontal probing is associated with reduced survival. Other negative prognostic factors: multiple cracks, radicular extension of cracks, terminal tooth location, preoperative apical periodontitis (AP), intracanal post. Historically, radicular cracks extending beyond the canal entrance regarded as unfavourable. Placing an intracanal barrier apical to the crack after endodontic treatment could increase fracture resistance and seal from microbial penetration. Davis & Shariff reported this approach + cuspal coverage restoration + careful occlusal management had a 4-year survival rate of 96.6%.

CT Conclusion: Encouraging outcomes for vital and endodontically treated CT restored with cuspal coverage restorations. Early management, cuspal coverage restorations, and absence of deep periodontal probing of non-endodontic origin increase survival. Careful occlusal assessment and management of parafunctional habits/interferences is essential. Due to broad variability in presentation, the term 'CT syndrome' should be AVOIDED.

SPLIT TOOTH
Complete, visible separation of the entire tooth into two parts, usually mesio-distal. Result of progression/expansion of a coronal crack. Literature on prevalence/presentation is sparse. Aetiology: progression of CT. Clinical: fragments completely separated or separated with pressure; symptoms of AP, narrow isolated periodontal probing, mobility; gentle occlusal probing wedges fragments apart. Radiographic: visible separation into >=2 fragments, usually root filled, periradicular radiolucency. Management: unfavourable prognosis, timely extraction should be considered to minimise acute symptoms and limit bone loss.

VERTICAL ROOT FRACTURES (VRF) IN NON-ROOT-FILLED TEETH (NRFT)
Prevalence: 6% to 37%, predilection for males and patients over 50 years. Majority of research involves the Chinese population. Mainly affects first molars, particularly mesio-buccal root of maxillary and mesial root of mandibular molars. Fracture line typically originates from root apex, appears on buccolingual aspect. Affected teeth commonly minimally/unrestored but with signs of excessive tooth surface loss.
Aetiology: multiple predisposing factors; certain Asian dietary patterns suggested to contribute to higher incidence of spontaneous VRF in NRFT.
Clinical: may be asymptomatic, temperature sensitivity, discomfort on mastication, pulpitis or AP symptoms. Isolated deep narrow pocket less commonly identified than in VRF of RFT. Sensibility positive or negative depending on extent.
Radiographic: subtle/obvious fracture line, PDL thickening, periradicular bone loss adjacent to fragments. Small FOV CBCT may confirm periradicular bone loss if PR inconclusive.
Management: Exploratory surgery if inconclusive. Early intervention essential. Extraction recommended for single-rooted teeth. Root resection (complete/partial) of affected root may be an option in multirooted teeth. Endodontic treatment of intact roots + restoration extending into affected canal apical to planned resection level. Cuspal coverage recommended. Limited evidence for intentional replantation and extraoral bonding. Current evidence on treatment strategies limited; more long-term studies needed.

VERTICAL ROOT FRACTURES (VRF) IN ROOT-FILLED TEETH (RFT)
Prevalence: VRF more commonly associated with RFT than NRFT. Reported prevalence of extraction of RFT with VRF ranges 4% to 32%. Maxillary (pre)molars and mandibular molars most commonly affected. Increases with age, more prevalent in 40+ patients.
Aetiology: multifactorial; most critical factors unknown. VRF is a common cause of extraction (13-21%) of RFT. Pathogenesis complex; three main stages: crack initiation, propagation, separation. Unlike traumatic dental injuries (acute, high-impact), VRFs develop as a dynamic cyclical fatigue process over a long period. Advanced stages: continuous microbial ingress, biofilm formation, loss of periodontal attachment adjacent to fracture line; eventually a split root.
Clinical: presentation depends on location/extent/nature. Early-stage hard to detect (asymptomatic). May have AP signs. Typical advanced features: isolated, narrow, deep periodontal pocket (pathognomonic if on both sides of a root) and multiple sinus tracts. Increased probing depths interpreted cautiously vs periodontal disease/sinus tract of endodontic origin. Removal of restorations/root filling helps determine presence/extent. Magnification essential; exploratory surgery if not visible (only buccal/lingual fracture lines accessible).
Radiographic: early-stage may vary from no obvious bone loss to subtle periradicular bone loss; long-standing typically presents periradicular (J-shaped) radiolucency and/or split root. CBCT may confirm periradicular bone loss if inconclusive. CBCT CANNOT reliably detect VRFs within the root because image resolution is insufficient to detect fractures typically 50-100 μm in width.
Clinical management: prognosis poor. Prompt management recommended to reduce acute AP symptoms and further bone breakdown (complicating future implant treatment). Extraction recommended in single-rooted tooth with VRF. In multi-rooted RFT, root resection or amputation may be considered. No data on survival rates of resection/amputation for VRF in RFT; extrapolation from root resection on periodontally affected teeth: 90.6% and 96.8% over 10 and 15 years respectively.
Preventive management: Prevention is critical — identify susceptible teeth, conservative endodontic procedures + expedient appropriate post-endodontic restoration. Minimise excessive dentine removal during access/instrumentation to preserve pericervical dentine. Adhesive post-endodontic techniques; posts placed 'passively', avoid excessive post-space. Immediate resin composite restoration of access cavity after obturation. Prompt cuspal coverage when indicated. Proximal contacts help dissipate occlusal forces; replace missing posterior units. In RFT with pre-existing crack(s), bioactive/adhesive intracanal materials beyond the crack extension may reduce propagation/microbial leakage.

UNIVERSAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CT, ST, AND VRF
Impact of excessive occlusal forces cannot be overemphasised. Consider opposing dentition (restoration status, occlusal topography). Occlusal stabilisation splints and/or specialist referral for parafunctional habits. Manage occlusal interferences on ALL teeth, not just affected ones. Composite resin canine ramps may re-establish canine guidance for posterior disocclusion, reducing lateral forces and masticatory muscle activity. Interdisciplinary approach for complex cases. Educate patient on prognosis and reducing excessive occlusal loading on cracked RFT.

CONCLUSION
Clinicians should be mindful of significance, prevention strategies, and timely management of CT and VRF. Patients should be aware of their role in limiting CT and VRF, especially as life expectancy and patient expectations increase. Periodic monitoring of (root-filled) CT is essential to detect early signs of periradicular bone loss, which may indicate an early-stage VRF.

AUTHORS: Shanon Patel (conceptualisation, methodology, visualisation, resources, original draft, review/editing, project administration); Peng-Hui Teng, Wan-Chuen Liao, Matthew Craig Davis, Ales Fidler, Franziska Haupt, Ronald Ordinola Zapata, Rahul Bose, Cristiano Fabiani (review/editing).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None declared. ETHICS: None.
