Effects of botulinum toxin in patients with myofascial pain related to temporomandibular joint disorders: A systematic review.

Authors: Rosa Marina Ramos-Herrada, Luis Ernesto Arriola-Guillen, Katherine Joselyn Atoche-Socola, Silvio Augusto Bellini-Pereira, Aron Aliaga-Del Castillo
Journal: Dent Med Probl. 2022;59(2):271-280. DOI: 10.17219/dmp/145759
PMID: 35775414 (no PMCID)

ABSTRACT: Botulinum toxin is used as an alternative for the treatment of chronic refractory myofascial pain derived from temporomandibular disorders (TMDs). It is important to establish the benefits of botulinum toxin in this type of symptomatology. The aim of the study was to conduct a systematic review in order to evaluate the effects of botulinum toxin in patients with myofascial pain related to temporomandibular disorders. The search was carried out systematically, without limitations of language or year of publication, until February 2021. The databases searched included PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, The Cochrane Library, and Latin American and Carribean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS). Partial gray literature was searched using Google Scholar, ClinicalTrials.gov, OpenGrey, and the reference lists of selected articles. Randomized controlled clinical trials evaluating the effects of botulinum toxin in the treatment of myofascial pain were included. The risk of bias was assessed with the Cochrane RoB 2.0 tool, and the The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach was used to determine the certainty of the scientific evidence. A total of 900 studies were retrieved, out of which only 8 randomized clinical trials were selected. From these 8 studies, the data of a total of 314 patients, predominantly women, between the ages of 18 to 75 years was obtained. After the assessment of the studies with the RoB 2.0 tool, 7 studies showed some concerns regarding the reported results and only one was at a low risk of overall bias. The analysis of the studies has shown that low doses of botulinum toxin are effective in the treatment of refractory myofascial pain associated with temporomandibular disorders. The studies presented medium- to low-certainty evidence.

Keywords: botulinum toxin; myofascial pain; temporomandibular joint disorders
MeSH: Botulinum Toxins; Myofascial Pain Syndromes; Temporomandibular Joint Disorders; Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
