1. Introduction

Temporomandibular disorders (TMDs) comprise a group of signs and symptoms including pain and dysfunction in the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), associated muscles, and tissues surrounding the joint. TMDs are the second most common musculoskeletal cause of pain and disability in the orofacial region [,,]. According to a comprehensive meta-analysis, the global prevalence of TMDs is estimated to be around 34%. The prevalence of TMDs varies significantly across different continents. In South America, the prevalence is the highest at 47%, followed by Asia with a prevalence rate of 33%, and Europe at 29%. North America shows a prevalence rate of 25%, whereas Africa has the lowest reported prevalence at 20%. This condition predominantly affects women, with a notable male-to-female ratio of approximately 1:2 to 1:6, being higher in South America and lower in Europe. This disparity highlights the significant impact of TMDs on women’s health, making it a critical area for focused research and healthcare interventions [].

Myogenous TMDs account for the majority of chronic orofacial pain cases []. Muscle pain diagnoses are classified in the Diagnostic Criteria for Temporomandibular Disorders (DC/TMD) into myalgia, tendonitis, myositis, and spasm []. TMDs can be caused and maintained by trauma and microtrauma. However, definitive causal factors for most cases of TMDs remain unclear []. A limitation of jaw movements and joint sounds such as clicking, or crepitus, are also commonly reported. The displacement of the condyle–disc system characterizes disc displacement within TMDs, where the disc is dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly to its physiologic position [].

The Taxonomic Classification for Temporomandibular Disorders categorizes TMDs into four groups []: pain-related TMDs and headaches, intra-articular joint disorders, degenerative joint disorders, and subluxation. Intra-articular joint disorders can be further categorized into four distinct diagnoses: 1. disc displacement with reduction; 2. disc displacement with reduction, with intermittent locking; 3. disc displacement without reduction, with limited opening; and 4. disc displacement without reduction without limited opening. These categories are determined by observable symptoms such as jaw locking, clicking, and constraints in jaw mobility, providing a comprehensive framework for understanding and diagnosing various forms of disc displacement in TMDs [,,,]. These signs and symptoms can be aggravated during general activities like chewing []. Factors contributing to the development of TMDs include biomechanical stress, psychological conditions such as stress and depression, and biological factors like hormonal imbalances. Additionally, poor sleep quality and anxiety are significant contributors to TMDs. Studies have found that females are more susceptible to TMDs, and other influential factors include somatization, oral parafunction, and anatomical variations. Hypertension, higher BMI, and autoimmune disorders such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and SAPHO syndrome have also been linked to the increased risk of developing TMDs [,,,,].

Studies have shown that, in many cases, TMDs resolve over time without treatment. Therefore, priority should be given to reversible, non-invasive procedures. The treatment goal should be managing symptoms and improving quality of life [].

Conservative treatment modalities include patient education, self-management, and biobehavioral therapy. Additionally, the pharmacological approach includes short-term treatments such as NSAIDs, analgesics, benzodiazepines, muscle relaxants, antidepressants, or glucosamine and chondroitin. Physical therapy often involves the use of physical agents, including heat and cold therapy to increase circulation and reduce inflammation, respectively, electrotherapy like TENS for nerve stimulation, ultrasound for tissue healing, muscle relaxation, exercise therapy for strength and flexibility, and manual therapy for joint manipulation, among others. Each modality is chosen based on the patient’s needs, providing comprehensive care for musculoskeletal conditions and injuries. Finally, orthopedic appliances or occlusal therapy may be indicated for some patients [,,,,].

For severe cases or those resistant to conservative treatment, surgical procedures have also been described as an option [,]. Surgical management may include minimally invasive procedures such as joint lavage (arthrocentesis), or more aggressive treatment including closed surgical procedures (arthroscopy) or open joint surgery (arthrotomy or arthroplasty). TMJ arthrocentesis allows for the irrigation, lavage, and/or intra-articular injection of solutions. Arthroscopy allows for the visualization of joint tissue visualization and facilitates manipulation, removal of adhesions, debridement, and biopsy [,].

Given that expert opinion recommends a conservative initial approach, but evidence regarding the risks and benefits of available treatment options is limited [,], the aim of this systematic review was to comprehensively analyze and compare the efficacy and safety profiles among various treatment modalities, ranging from conservative, minimally invasive interventions to surgical procedures, in patients diagnosed with TMDs and disc displacement.

2. Materials and Methods

A systematic review was undertaken following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines []. The PICO question [] guiding this review is described in:

The inclusion criteria related to the study design comprised only randomized controlled trials (RCTs) performed in adult patients of any sex diagnosed with TMDs specifically characterized by disc displacement, with or without reduction. Only trials published in English were included. There was no restriction on the publication date; studies published up to the search date were considered. In cases where the full article was not available, efforts were made to contact the authors to obtain the full manuscript text.

Any intervention meant to treat or address symptoms of TMDs with disc displacement was assessed. Some of the interventions considered were counseling, cognitive therapy, jaw exercises, occlusal appliances, pharmacological management, arthrocentesis, arthroscopy, and arthrotomy.

Selected outcomes include joint and masticatory muscle pain, pain pressure threshold jaw movements, maximum mouth opening, joint noises, jaw function scores, and patient quality of life.

A search was performed on 17 September 2023, using the following databases: PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science. Search terms were developed that suited the scope of the review, adapted to each database’s query tools, and applied, filtering by publication type for randomized controlled trials. The search strategy was built up combining search words and MeSH terms. For PubMed, the search query “(“Temporomandibular Joint Disorders” [Mesh]) and “Temporomandibular Joint Disc” [Mesh]” was used; on the Scopus database, the search strategy used was “TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Temporomandibular Joint Disorders”) and “Temporomandibular Joint Disc”); and on Web of Science, we utilized the following search expression: (“Temporomandibular Joint Disorders”) and (“Temporomandibular Joint Disc”) (Title) or (“Temporomandibular Joint Disorders”) and (“Temporomandibular Joint Disc”) (Abstract) or (“Temporomandibular Joint Disorders”) and (“Temporomandibular Joint Disc”) (Author Keywords) or (“Temporomandibular Joint Disorders”) and (“Temporomandibular Joint Disc”) (Keyword Plus)”. Duplicate articles were identified and removed before the screening process began.

An initial screening based on title and abstract was performed by two independent researchers during the months of September and October 2023. For the independent manuscript selection, the Rayyan tool (accessed on 19 September 2023) was used in “blind mode” to ensure that reviewers were not influenced by each other’s decisions, thereby maintaining objectivity and minimizing bias in the screening process. To solve the conflict in manuscript selection, two meetings were held in November 2023 for a careful analysis and discussion to reach an agreement. Additionally, all the included manuscripts were carefully analyzed as many times as necessary to ensure appropriate inclusion. A third researcher, a specialist in TMDs, helped to resolve any doubts and reach consensus. Studies that matched our requirements were then reviewed and organized in a table in the months of November and December 2023. These studies were systematically compared and evaluated to ensure that only those with appropriate methodologies and outcomes were included in the systematic review, and that the results were valid and reliable. To ensure the process, a third researcher, a specialist in TMDs, reviewed all the information. Authors were contacted if there were missing data or no full text was available. Articles were then assessed for eligibility from the full text. The level of agreement between the authors was assessed using the kappa test [].

3. Results

Our initial search returned 2289 articles: 828 from Scopus, 1417 from PubMed, and 44 from Web of Science. After removing duplicate records, 1789 entries remained. Based on title and abstract, records were screened and 1736 were excluded. Of the 53 trials that were included, the researcher could not retrieve the full text of 4, which were excluded. The remaining 49 reports were assessed for eligibility. Eleven were excluded for one of the following reasons: diagnostic criteria were not described; the trial included patients under 18 years old, patient randomization was not complete, or the trial included some patients without disc derangement. A flow diagram of the selection process is depicted in. The kappa test agreement between the authors was 0.719. Disagreement was resolved by consensus among the three authors.

The risk of bias was assessed with the Cochrane RoB 2 tool at the outcome level visualized with the Cochrane risk of bias VISualization app 4.0 []; the results are available in.

3.1. Description of Included Studies

The extracted data characteristics for each study are available in. The 38 studies included in this review assessed the effectiveness of physical therapy (n = 8), physical agents (n = 3), pharmacological therapy (n = 3), occlusal devices (n = 15), arthrocentesis (n = 14), arthroscopic surgery (n = 4), or open TMJ surgery (n = 5). The following main results extracted from RCTs were divided according to the treatment under study.

3.1.1. Physical Therapy

Simões et al. [] conducted a trial in 70 patients with TMD diagnoses, measuring the effect of jaw exercises alongside counseling. They concluded that the intervention group had less pain (= 0.041) and click discomfort (< 0.001) at the 30-day follow-up and better self-perception (= 0.002). Magesty et al. [] also examined physical therapy and confirmed the benefit of a jaw exercise program alongside counseling, with reduced pain (−1.15,= 0.004), psychological discomfort (−1.49,< 0.001), psychological incapacity (−1.23,< 0.001), and total OHIP scores (−5.21,< 0.001). However, a trial conducted by Craane et al. [] found no additional benefit from the physical therapy program alongside medical counseling.

To assess the relative benefit of a supervised exercise program versus a home-based exercise program, Capan et al. [] conducted a trial on 29 patients. The study revealed better outcomes for the supervised program group regarding pain and MMO (< 0.05).

In a trial by Bas et al. [], a group of 27 patients with disc displacement without reduction (DDwoR) underwent arthrocentesis and occlusal appliance treatment. They were divided into two groups. The study group was assigned self-administered physiotherapy. The conclusion drawn was that while physical exercise post-arthrocentesis had no effect on the range of mouth opening, it did reduce pain levels (difference of 1.81 in VAS,< 0.05).

A study by Olbort et al. [] showed the non-inferiority of a LPM exercise program in comparison to an occlusal stabilization appliance. Additionally, Haketa et al. [] compared a joint exercise program to a stabilization splint-based therapy, and the exercise group had a faster recovery of jaw function (< 0.001).

3.1.2. Physical Agents Used through Equipment

Ekici et al. [] assessed the effectiveness of high-intensity laser therapy (HILT) and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation therapy (TENS) in patients with TMDs and DDwR. The authors concluded that both interventions were beneficial, pain was reduced by 48% and 25%, respectively, and MMO was increased by 24% and 10%, respectively. The HILT group demonstrated greater improvement in symptoms and function after 12 weeks (< 0.05).

Ekici et al. [] compared HILT, ultrasound therapy (US), and occlusal splint devices to counseling and home exercise in patients with DDwR. Their results indicated that HILT, US, and occlusal splints were effective treatment options in this group of patients. Pain was reduced by 0.64 (0.32), 0.66 (0.18), and 0.44 (0.40), respectively. MMO was increased by 0.19 (0.1), 0.25 (0.23), and 0.2 (0.11), respectively.

Rady et al. [] published a trial evaluating low-level laser therapy and botulinum toxin (BTX) intra-muscular injection in patients with DDwR in comparison with an anterior repositioning appliance (ARA). Their assessment was that both LLLT and BTX injection are effective options with a faster effect than the control. BTX can be injected via an intraoral or extraoral approach. Altaweed et al. [] compared both approaches and their results favor the intraoral method as more convenient for the patient and faster to execute, while having similar clinical results (a mean time of 10.29 ± 2.69 for the extraoral approach and 4.86 ± 1.53 for the intraoral approach).

El-Shaheed et al. [] conducted a study comparing LLLT and SST individually as well as in combination. They concluded that both therapies were effective, and their combination provided a faster and more effective treatment. Marini et al. [] also evaluated the effectiveness of superpulsed LLLT in patients with DDwoR and osteoarthritis. Their results support superpulsed LLLT as a viable treatment, with significantly better results than a placebo or conservative therapy (lower VAS pain score and maximum greater mouth movement (= 0.0001)).

A study by Peroz et al. [] evaluated the use of pulsed electromagnetic fields (PEMF) to treat TMJ pain and limited mobility. They found no specific treatment effects from the therapy (> 0.05).

3.1.3. Intra-Articular Injections

Gencer et al. [] investigated the effects of intra-articular injections of hyaluronic acid, tenoxicam, and dexamethasone in a trial with 100 patients. Their findings indicated that hyaluronic acid had the most significant effect on pain reduction (> 0.05), while tenoxicam and dexamethasone, though less p