TITLE: Case of Legionella pneumophila Serogroup 1 Infection Linked to Water Flosser, France
DOI: 10.3201/eid3202.251386
PMID: 41714876
PMCID: PMC12928229
JOURNAL: Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2026 Feb; 32(2)
AUTHORS: Slekovec C, Biguenet A, Jeanvoine A, Hocquet D, Bertrand X

ABSTRACT:
Legionnaires' disease is a severe respiratory infection that causes increased mortality in hospitalized and immunocompromised patients. We report a nosocomial case in France linked to a water flosser. Our findings underscore the need for vigilance regarding such devices and highlight strategies for their safe management within healthcare settings.

FULL TEXT:
Legionnaires' disease is a respiratory infection caused by inhaling particles contaminated with Legionella spp. bacteria. Although most cases are community-acquired, mortality is nearly 3 times higher for hospital-acquired infections (8.6% vs. 28.6%), especially among immunocompromised patients. This increase in mortality underscores the need for routine monitoring of water systems and the use of protective measures such as point-of-use filters. Environmental investigations are critical for identifying sources of contamination; however, whereas healthcare facilities have the infrastructure to conduct such investigations, implementation in private homes remains challenging. Extra-hospital sources of exposure are likely underrecognized. We describe a case of nosocomial Legionnaires' disease traced to a water flosser from the patient's home.

The Study:
A 48-year-old man with IgG Kappa myeloma was hospitalized in August 2024 for a peripheral autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in the hematology unit of Besançon University Hospital, France. On day 4 he underwent an autograft without complications. On day 10 a fever developed and Legionella was isolated from blood cultures. Piperacillin/tazobactam (4 g every 6 hours) therapy was begun adapted to the strain resistance profile; following blood cultures were negative. However the fever persisted and respiratory symptoms developed on day 16. His condition worsened on day 17 and he was transferred to the medical intensive care unit (MICU). At MICU admission a BinaxNOW Legionella urinary antigen test for serogroup 1 (Lp1) was positive. The same day, Lp1 was detected by PCR on bronchoalveolar samples and cultured endotracheal aspiration samples. No tests for Legionella spp. were conducted before day 17. The respiratory distress syndrome caused by pneumonia led to a MICU stay with mechanical ventilation, dialysis, and cardiorespiratory arrest without sequelae. The patient experienced multiple organ failure with acute renal failure requiring extrarenal purification. Complications: necrosis of extremities, sacral pressure ulcer, malnutrition, amyotrophy. His condition gradually improved, enabling discharge from MICU after 47 days.

Because the incubation period was consistent with acquisition in the hematology unit, environmental sources of Legionella spp. were searched. During hospitalization the patient stayed in a room intended for immunocompromised patients; the sink and shower were equipped with Filt'Ray 2G anti-Legionella filters. Water samples were taken from the bathroom (sink and shower with and without filter and the toilet bowl). Samples analyzed per NF T 90-431 standard for counting Legionella spp.; 500 mL of water in sterile vials with 20 mg sodium thiosulfate; inoculated on GVPC plates; incubated 36°C for 8-11 days; identified by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.

The mixed water from sink and shower (with filter and after removing filter) and the toilet bowl water showed NO evidence of Legionella spp. In addition, the 10 routine tests conducted in 2024 on the water network supplying the ward were all negative for Legionella spp. During the environmental investigation, a water flosser (Panasonic) was found in the patient's bathroom. This device was NOT listed in the inventory performed at admission. The device belonged to the patient, who used it at home with tap water, and was brought in without informing the healthcare team. Because the patient could not be interviewed, no information could be gathered on use (frequency of use during hospitalization, type of water used, frequency of cleaning and disinfection). To sample the water flosser, the tank was filled with sterile water, the device run, and 100 mL of water collected from the jet. Lp1 and Legionella serogroup 2-14 were recovered at a concentration of 300 CFU/L.

Genomes of the 2 Lp1 isolates (1 from the patient and 1 from the water flosser) were sequenced by Oxford Nanopore technology. Genomes assembled with Flye; sequence types deduced from whole-genome sequencing with legsta. The 2 strains had IDENTICAL genomes and belonged to sequence type 42, which has been described in France and other countries but is not a major clone. The investigation indicates it is likely the clinical strain and the Lp1 strain identified from the water flosser have a common origin. After this incident, no new cases were reported in the hospital. The patient was hospitalized 62 days total, including 47 days in MICU.

Conclusions:
We report a case of Legionnaires' disease transmitted by a contaminated water flosser, supported by genomic identity of Lp1 isolates from the patient and water flosser. Other commonly suspected sources (shower, sink, toilet) were negative for Legionella spp. The Legionella in the device (including Lp1 responsible for infection, and serogroup 2-14) likely originated from the patient's home water network. The reservoir of the device showed signs of fouling, indicative of the use of nonsterile water and lack of regular cleaning. Most manufacturers do not advocate use of sterile/microbiologically controlled water; instead they recommend regular cleaning and disinfection. The global water flosser market is growing ($966.726 million in 2021, projected $1,189 million by 2025), driven by oral hygiene awareness, preference for wireless/portable devices, and oral health professional guidelines. Because of increasing use, a growing number of immunocompromised patients at risk of Legionnaires' disease could be exposed. No other cases of contamination through water flossers were found in the literature, indicating a low risk; nevertheless unrecognized cases cannot be excluded.

Water flossers might provide favorable conditions for bacterial growth, especially Legionella spp. The use of nonsterile water can lead to biofilm accumulation within the device tubing. In addition, the pressurized spray directed into the patient's mouth may generate aerosols that are readily inhaled. Several studies have demonstrated bacterial colonization of water flossers and the potential transmission of contaminated water jets; in particular, colonization by the major caries-associated pathogen appears difficult to prevent. Therefore it is necessary to raise awareness among manufacturers and users regarding the potential risk to immunocompromised patients. In healthcare settings, the use of such devices should be carefully controlled to prevent nosocomial Legionnaires' disease, and healthcare workers should be aware of the risk of devices being brought in from the outside by patients or family members. Despite all measures implemented in hospitals to control Legionella transmission to immunocompromised patients, attention should be paid to unconventional modes of transmission.
