1. J Clin Periodontol. 2018 May;45(5):613-623. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12890.

Early and late implant failure of submerged versus non-submerged implant 
healing: A systematic review, meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis.

Troiano G(1), Lo Russo L(1), Canullo L(2), Ciavarella D(1), Lo Muzio L(1), Laino 
L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, 
Foggia, Italy.
(2)Private Practitioner, Roma, Italy.
(3)Multidisciplinary Department of Medical-Surgical and Dental Specialties, 
University of Campania - Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this systematic review was to analyse current evidence 
regarding differences in early and late implant failure as well as in marginal 
bone level (MBL) changes between submerged and non-submerged healed dental 
implants.
METHODS: PUBMED, SCOPUS, EMBASE and Web of Science databases were searched for 
prospective randomized and non-randomized controlled studies addressing direct 
comparison between submerged and non-submerged implant healing, without 
performing immediate loading. Early and late implant failure (before or after 
6 months from implant placement, respectively) together with MBL were the 
investigated outcomes. Risk of bias assessment was performed using the Cochrane 
Collaboration Tool for Randomized clinical trials. Meta-analysis was performed 
and the power of the meta-analytic findings determined by trial sequential 
analysis (TSA).
RESULTS: Eleven studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the 
review. Results of this systematic review revealed a small higher rate (2%) of 
early implant failure when a non-submerged healing approach is performed. Late 
implant failure appears not to be different in submerged or non-submerged 
healing, but the power of evidence, as determined by TSA, is not high. If we 
consider MBL changes at 1 year from implant load, it seems that non-submerged 
healing may better preserve marginal bone, although with a small effect size 
(0.13 mm).
CONCLUSIONS: Implants placed with a non-submerged technique have a higher risk 
(2%) of early failure. The power of the evidence about the effects on MBL is 
low, but present results seem to favour non-submerged healing, although with a 
very small effect size.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.12890
PMID: 29574852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]