Title: Trigeminal neuralgia: therapeutic strategies to restore quality of life
Journal: Journal of Oral & Facial Pain and Headache, 2024;38(3):32-37
DOI: 10.22514/jofph.2024.024
PMID: 39800569
PMCID: PMC11810647
Source: PubMed Central (retrieved via PubMed MCP get_full_text_article)

Abstract:
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) usually affects the maxillary and mandibular branches
of the fifth cranial nerve. Although the condition is primarily unilateral, few
cases of bilateral manifestation have been reported. TN is uncommon; however, it
significantly affects patients' quality of life because the neuropathic pain
worsens over time. Paroxysmal pain is triggered by mechanical stimuli or
environmental factors. Diagnosis is usually based on clinical findings, including
pain triggered by palpation of distinct areas; nevertheless, imaging studies,
such as magnetic resonance imaging, are always used to rule out a secondary
cause. TN can be caused by several factors, such as trauma and neurovascular
compression, or could be idiopathic, which complicates its treatment. Although
several studies focused on TN have been reported, a treatment modality with 100%
efficacy is lacking. The first-line treatment is pharmacological; however,
surgery may be required if symptoms persist.

Full Text:

1. Introduction

Pain is an annoying feeling and emotional experience associated with a potential
for tissue damage. It affects 4–13 people per 100,000 inhabitants. Although pain
is subjective, the manifestations may help the treating clinician in the
diagnosis [,].

The causes of facial pain include tooth pain, myofascial pain, temporomandibular
joint disorders, cluster headaches, idiopathic facial pain and trigeminal
neuralgia (TN) []. TN, which is also known as tic doloreux, is characterized by
an episode of unilateral pain in the region supplied by one of the three branches
of the trigeminal nerve, which provides afferent innervation to the multiple
cavities in the facial skeleton and the dermatomes in this region [].

The trigeminal nerve has three branches: V1 (ophthalmic, purely sensory), V2
(maxillary, purely sensory) and V3 (mandibular, sensory/motor). The sensory
fibers travel to the trigeminal ganglion (also known as the Gasserian ganglion)
in Meckel's cave. The fibers then travel to the spinal trigeminal nucleus, where
they synapse with second-order neurons whose fibers travel to the ventral
posteromedial nucleus in the thalamus. Finally, the information is transmitted to
the sensory cortex. TN is usually unilateral, with a predilection for the right
side. Few patients present with bilateral pain, and in approximately 36%–42%
of patients, the V2 and V3 branches are affected.

The diagnosis is based on the exclusion of other unrelated pathological
processes with similar clinical features, such as neuralgia of the ninth and
tenth cranial nerves; oral or facial pain related to organic problems of the
concerned organs; altered vision, smell, taste or chewing functions; and pain due
to facial skeletal damage.

The purpose of this review was to summarize the information on TN, including its
etiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis and therapeutic options, for health
personnel, particularly the general/specialist dentist who plays an important
role in the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. Furthermore, the review aimed to
provide an in-depth and updated understanding of TN for informed decision-making
to facilitate the maximum improvement in patients' quality of life.

2. Materials and methods

Using the BIDI UNAM Digital Library we had have access to the PubMed, EBSCO,
ScienceDirect, Springer, ProQuest, BMJ, Health Library, Elsevier and SciELO
database were used for get the articles.

3. Results

These results were obtained until 31 May 2024. The searches retrieved a total of
20,121 articles, of which 32 articles related to TN were included in
the review.

To select the articles used in this work, the most recent articles with
representative information according to year and content were used.

Table 1. Keywords searched.
Trigeminal neuralgia — 10,738
Facial pain and trigeminal neuralgia — 2432
Trigeminal neuralgia diagnosis — 5509
Dental pain and trigeminal neuralgia — 619
Trigeminal neuralgia incidence — 768
Laser therapy in trigeminal neuralgia — 55
Total — 20,121

3.1 Incidence

The incidence of TN is 4.3 per 100,000 people per year, and the incidence is
higher in women than in men (5.9:3.4) [].

TN is more frequent on the right side than on the left side in patients with
multiple sclerosis but not in patients with idiopathic neuralgia. Patients with
multiple sclerosis, malignant tumors, trauma, infections and systemic lupus
erythematosus are more likely to develop bilateral TN [].

3.2 Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of TN includes trigeminal autonomic cephalopathy,
posttraumatic or postherpetic pain, and other facial pains. The first-line
treatment is prophylactic administration of sodium channel blockers, and the
second-line treatment is neurosurgical intervention [].

Determining the location of pain in the dermatomes of the fifth cranial nerve is
more important than identifying actions that can trigger pain []. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is routinely performed for patients with suspected TN
because of the ability to detect neurovascular compression and exclude other
diagnoses by visualizing the trigeminal ganglion, nerve and related structures
[].

3.3 Etiology

TN is classified into three categories according to the etiology. TN occurring
without an apparent cause is called idiopathic. Classical TN occurs due to
compression of the trigeminal nerve root by a vessel, whereas TN provoked by a
major neurological disease, such as a tumor of the cerebellopontine angle or
multiple sclerosis, is classified as secondary TN []. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is the preferred method for examining the trigeminal nerve because it
reveals changes in the morphology of the trigeminal nerve root and vascular
compression in classical TN. However, MRI frequently shows blood vessels in
contact with the nerve root in asymptomatic individuals. Therefore, the diagnosis
cannot be based on MRI findings alone [].

The diagnosis of secondary TN is usually based on the identification of a major
neurological disease.

Cerebellopontine angle tumors are observed in 15% of patients with secondary
TN. Most of these are benign, and they usually compress the root near its entry
into the pons. Furthermore, TN can be caused by vascular compression at the
entrance of the trigeminal nerve root [].

According to the neurovascular compression theory, nerve damage due to
compression can produce atrophy, hypertrophy or demyelination of the nerve,
causing the nerve to misfire, resulting in pain []. Furthermore, compression
can trigger paroxysmal ectopic discharges [].

3.4 Symptoms

Patients with TN tend to have poor quality of life, and patients with severe TN
may attempt suicide owing to uncontrollable pain. TN most frequently affects the
second (maxillary) or third (mandibular) division of the trigeminal nerve [].

Mechanical stimuli that trigger pain commonly include light touch, talking,
chewing, tooth brushing or washing the face. Patients usually have more than one
trigger area, the most common being the nasolabial area, lips, chin, cheek and
alveolar gingiva [].

Symptoms of TN tend to deteriorate over time with reduced responsiveness to
medication despite increased dosage and prescription of additional agents. The
definition of treatment success varies between medical and surgical studies on
TN. In medical studies, treatment success is typically defined as achieving at
least 50% pain relief compared to that at baseline, whereas surgical studies
generally consider complete pain relief as treatment success [].

Individuals experiencing facial pain often find themselves navigating between
different medical specialties. Owing to the nature of pain, history and
localization, many patients initially seek consultation with dentists. Some
patients may have a dental origin for the pain, allowing dentists and
maxillofacial surgeons to identify a treatable cause [].

3.5 Treatment

Treatment of TN can be classified as pharmacological, surgical and alternative
therapy.

3.5.1 Pharmacological treatment

Currently, pharmacologic management is the treatment of choice, drugs such as
carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, gabapentin and lamotrigine, among others.
However, 100% pain relief cannot be guaranteed. Therefore, treatment should be
selected based on the etiology of TN [].

The International recommendation about surgical treatment is for patients who
have resistant pain or who cannot tolerate medications owing to adverse effects
[].

The carbamazepine blocks the voltage-gated sodium channels resulting in
inhibition of action potentials, reduction of synaptic transmission and
stabilization of the membrane potential in hyperexcitable neurons []. This drug
seems to be more effective relieving pain, this drug is considered the gold
standard for the initial medical treatment of trigeminal neuralgia, but also
causes adverse effects such as drowsiness, dizziness, rash, liver damage and
ataxia and has the potential for multiple drug interactions []. For the same
reason that there are adverse effects, other medications are used to mitigate the
pain.

Table 2. Pharmacological treatment and its dosage.
Anticonvulsants:
- Carbamazepine: 100 mg up to 1200 mg per day
- Oxcarbazepine: 900 mg up to 2400 mg per day
- Gabapentin: 900 mg up to 3600 mg per day
- Pregabalin: 75 mg up to 600 mg per day
- Lamotrigine: 100 mg up to 600 mg per day
- Phenytoin: 300 mg up to 600 mg per day
Antispasmodic:
- Baclofen: 25 mg up to 135 mg per day
Toxin:
- Botulinum toxin: 25–75 International Units per infiltration
(Gambeta et al., 2020), (Latorre et al., 2023), (Boto, 2010).

3.5.2 Surgical treatments

3.5.2.1 Rhizotomy

The most commonly used techniques include 3 different techniques: percutaneous
balloon compression, percutaneous radiofrequency rhizotomy and percutaneous
glycerol rhizotomy [].

In cases where open surgery is not feasible, percutaneous minimally invasive
procedures may be attempted. These procedures are ablative in nature, destroying
nerve fibers and, consequently, varying degrees of facial anesthesia.

Radiofrequency rhizotomy uses thermal energy to damage preganglionic trigeminal
rootlets, providing immediate pain relief in up to 97% of cases with a 42%
recurrence rate at 5 years. The extent of pain relief depends on the depth of
facial anesthesia, as expected from an ablative procedure [].

3.5.2.2 Vascular decompression

Since vascular compression is the most widely accepted cause of primary TN,
microvascular decompression may be the most rational treatment option. The
initial success rate, mortality, and recurrence rate for this procedure are
92.7%, 0.7% and 2% per year, respectively. Procedural complications, including
cerebellar injury, hearing loss, facial paralysis and cerebrospinal fluid
fistula, occur at a frequency of <1% and in 15% of cases, no significant
vascular compression is observed [].

In patients with insufficient symptom relief or those who cannot tolerate the
treatment, adjunctive drug therapy or monotherapy with medications such as
gabapentin, pregabalin, lamotrigine or baclofen may be attempted. Common
medications such as over-the-counter analgesics or opioids are usually
ineffective. Neurosurgical treatment options consist of either microvascular
decompression or percutaneous treatment of the lesion.

Non-destructive surgical treatment: microvascular decompression is the treatment
of choice in patients with confirmed contact between the trigeminal nerve and
cerebral vessels, which are refractory to pharmacological management. It is a
non-ablative microsurgical procedure performed under general anesthesia through a
3-cm craniotomy behind the ipsilateral ear. Under a microscope, the trigeminal
nerve is identified and its relationships in the cerebellopontine cistern are
explored for compressions, most frequently by the superior cerebellar artery;
however, they can also be of venous origin, such as by the superior petrosal vein
complex []. The offending blood vessels are dissected and either secured by
adhering to the tentorium or separated from the nerve using a piece of felt [].

A previous study on drug-resistant TN reported better pain relief and recurrence
rates with microvascular decompression than those with gamma-knife surgery
[].

3.5.2.3 Alternative treatments

Previous studies provide sufficient evidence for acupuncture analgesia [].
Acupuncture not only inhibits the supraspinal central nervous system region but
also induces the combined action of the endocrine and pain-control systems.
Furthermore, acupuncture affects the local nerves, reducing their degree of
direct pain sensitivity. Regarding the effectiveness of acupuncture for patients
with TN, compared with carbamazepine (the gold-standard treatment for TN),
acupuncture reduces pain (very low confidence of evidence), response rates (very
low confidence of evidence) and the number of adverse events (very low confidence
of evidence). However, the evidence is insufficient to recommend its use.

Several studies have reported that compared to placebo, botulinum toxin type A
(BTX-A) provides clinically significant benefits in the treatment of TN in terms
of the proportion of responders, mean number of paroxysms per day, and visual
analog scale scores at the end of follow-up. Furthermore, the effect of BTX-A
appears to be relatively long-lasting (at least 3 months) [].

Other treatments for TN include stereotaxic radiosurgery, percutaneous
destructive neurosurgical techniques (chemical neurolysis with glycerol),
percutaneous balloon compression, cryotherapy and peripheral block with alcohol.
These will not be delved into based on the objectives of this study [].

3.5.3 Laser therapy

The laser is a painless, easy to apply and non-invasive method that uses light
energy generated by atomic excitation that emits photons. The physical process
that allows the laser to work is called stimulated emission. Low-level laser
therapy (LLLT) has been applied clinically to a wide variety of disorders. This
therapeutic method has proven to be effective, less invasive and free of serious
side effects for numerous diseases [].

Multiple studies have shown that low-intensity laser therapy could be considered
for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia. The laser relieves pain without side
effects, making it particularly useful for patients with neuralgia who tolerate
pharmacological treatment poorly [].

LLLT has been used in treatment of different diseases especially chronic pains
and has been reported as an effective method for alleviating pain []. Its
pain-relieving mechanism involves the reduction of histamine, bradykinin,
acetylcholine and prostaglandin E2, while simultaneously increasing the
expression of precursor messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) for endorphins,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and enkephalins []. Clinical studies of the
effects of LLLT on injured nerves have revealed an increase in nerve function and
improved myelin production capacity [].

Finally, it has been shown in animal models to be effective in promoting axonal
growth in damaged nerves [].

4. Discussion

TN is a pathologic process mainly characterized by recurring episodes of intense
short duration pain in the area of innervation by the sensory branches of the
trigeminal nerve.

This condition, known since ancient times, has been extensively researched;
however, several aspects remain unexplored. Pain triggers typically include
innocuous mechanical stimuli such as light touch, talking, chewing or washing the
face.

Owing to the several potential etiologies of TN, obtaining a definitive
diagnosis can be challenging. Primary neuralgia can be easily diagnosed using MRI
and must be used to diagnose secondary neuralgia [].

The optimal approach for diagnosing any of the three types relies on patient
history and physical examination because specific laboratory tests to confirm TN
are lacking.

TN is classified into three etiological types: idiopathic, classic (caused by
vascular nerve compression) and secondary (related to major neurological
diseases). Treatment is typically initiated with medications such as
anticonvulsants, muscle relaxants and neuroleptic agents. When medications fail
to alleviate pain, surgical approaches such as microvascular decompression or
ablative percutaneous procedures are considered.

Surgical techniques range from microvascular decompression to radiofrequency
ablation, with varying success rates and potential complications such as facial
anesthesia. In addition, analgesic blockade using lidocaine, BTX-A and
acupuncture can be applied, although their effectiveness and duration of pain
relief remain unclear.

Although therapeutic options contribute to treatment success, achieving complete
efficacy can be challenging.

However, a cure is not the primary objective, as these treatments initially help
manage the disease. Various studies have identified multiple alternatives to
expedite progress toward the desired goal. However, comprehensive information is
required to decide whether these alternatives offer infallible benefits, pose
greater harm due to invasiveness or yield null results. Therefore, the
exploration of treatments based on different philosophies or expert viewpoints
should continue.

Leclercq et al. reported that the therapeutic approach is
primarily "medical", that is, focused on pharmacological treatment. This
involves administering antiepileptic drugs such as carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine,
gabapentin or lamotrigine to stabilize hyperexcited neuronal membranes, inhibit
repetitive neuronal discharges and reduce synaptic propagation of nerve impulses
[]. However, the same authors suggested that drug-based treatment may fail and
proposed implementation of a predominantly surgical therapy. We believe this is
an extreme approach, as the authors did not consider the potential outcomes of
drug treatment, almost implying a false crown for pharmaceutical interventions.

Rhizolysis involves the application of high-frequency electrical current or
radiofrequency energy through an electrode to induce coagulation and denaturation
of proteins in the affected tissue. The authors support this technique based on
favorable results for several years; however, they acknowledge the risk of losing
afferent function in these nerve pathways, resulting in a more damaging,
incapacitating, and detrimental treatment than the pathological process itself
[].

In contrast, Wang et al. stated full confidence in pharmacological
therapy as a promising treatment. They administered carbamazepine and, as an
alternative, chose topiramate []. Carbamazepine is considered the gold-
standard treatment for TN, even by experts such as Ang et al.
advocating less invasive alternatives like acupuncture.

Carbamazepine reduces painful and uncomfortable symptoms in 100% of treated
patients, and in case of adverse effects, it is replaced by oxcarbazepine, with
the only drawback being its cost []. Wang et al. reported that
drugs like gabapentin or lamotrigine, recommended by Leclercq et al.
have an uncertain role in treatment. Maarbjerg et al. recommend
combined treatment when the maximum doses of carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine
cannot be administered due to adverse effects; the commonly used drugs for
combination therapy are lamotrigine, baclofen, pregabalin and gabapentin [].

Wang et al. reported that surgical treatments are effective in
medication-refractory patients. However, surgery is the last resort, and the
authors categorize it as destructive. We believe that in a matter of this
magnitude, each opinion should be scrutinized. Although developing new surgical
techniques is a significant advancement, information about this pathological
process is still in its infancy, and a more in-depth exploration of medication is
necessary. In dentistry, the most prominent role in therapy may indeed be
pharmacological.

5. Conclusions

The diagnosis of TN is often complicated, and several patients go through a
trial-and-error phase to find an effective therapeutic approach, as there is no
one-size-fits-all solution. Imaging and clinical studies have been used to
achieve an accurate diagnosis.

Chronic pain can affect patients' mood, sleep quality and social relationships.
Therefore, emotional support and understanding from family, friends and
healthcare professionals is crucial for helping patients cope with the physical
and emotional burden of the disease. This is vital to provide effective treatment
and improve the quality of life of patients with TN.

Information about the function and effectiveness of alternative treatments for
TN is limited, and future studies should investigate these aspects.
