Tridimensional Analysis of Maxillary Teeth Movements in Premolar-Extraction Cases Treated With Clear Aligners

Objectives

To investigate movements of maxillary teeth in four-premolar extraction cases treated with clear aligners (CAs), as well as their influencing factors.

Materials and Methods

Forty-seven patients underwent four first or second premolars extractions having been treated with CAs. CBCT images were collected pre- and post-treatment for superimposition and measurement. A paired-test was employed to compare designed and achieved tooth movements. A linear mixed-effects model was utilized to study the effects of designed tooth movements, age, different premolar extractions, anchorage methods, space closing patterns and attachment types on the tooth movements.

Results

In the anteroposterior direction, the movements of the incisor crowns were fully achieved, whereas the roots were only poorly achieved. Both the roots and crowns of the canines showed less distal displacement than expected, especially the roots. The crowns of the posterior teeth exhibited greater forward movement than expected compared with their roots. In the lateral displacement (LD), the incisors failed to move distally, with the U2 root showing the greatest discrepancy (< .001). In the occlusal-gingival direction, the incisor crowns demonstrated increased extrusion, particularly U1. Adolescents exhibited greater discrepancies in U1 crown movements compared with adults (< .001). Although the magnitude of U6 root discrepancies in LD was similar between adolescents and adults, the direction of movement differed significantly (< .001). The factors that significantly influenced treatment outcomes included age, staging strategy, attachment design, and anchorage methods.

Conclusions

In premolar-extraction with CAs, the root of the incisors and entire canines required more retraction in design, and the crown needed more intrusion. Miniscrews can cause uncontrolled tilting movement of U1. Different space closing patterns and attachment types affected the anterior teeth and the anchorage of posterior teeth. These findings provide references for optimizing a treatment plan design using clear aligner treatment.

Introduction

The challenges and scope of clear aligner treatment (CAT) have been expanding. Initially, due to root control limitations, CAT was mainly applied to non-extraction cases.However, with continuous material and treatment design advances, its application in extraction cases has gradually increased.Previous studies indicated that in CAT with premolar-extraction treatment, there were differences between achieved and designed tooth movements.,,Specifically, the lingual inclination of the central incisors and the distal inclination of canines were more pronounced than designed, while the amount of retraction and intrusion for these teeth was insufficient. For first molars, the mesial inclination, mesial movement, buccal inclination and intrusion exceed the designed parameters. Various factors influence the predictability of tooth movements in CAT, including patient-related factors (eg, age, gender, compliance) and treatment designs (eg, elastics, anchorage appliances, attachments).

Some studies have explored tooth movements in CAT with premolar-extraction, often revealing undesired consequences, including molar anchorage loss and insufficient anterior teeth retraction.,,,,However, these studies primarily focused on crown movement while neglecting the root – which is a critical factor in evaluating the success of orthodontic treatment.

In recent years, as cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) technology has advanced, it enabled accurate evaluation of teeth crowns and roots, and precise calculation of tooth angulation changes.Existing studies have obtained root positions by registering intra-oral scans with CBCT data.Nevertheless, some studies have indicated that the accuracy of such registration can be affected by segmentation precision, operator experience, and radiation artifacts from dental restorations.Notably, CBCT can achieve precise superimposition by registering stable anatomical regions (eg, the anterior cranial base).Nada et al found that CBCT superimposition using the anterior cranial base as a reference produced good accuracy and reproducibility.Feng et al proposed an anti-tipping formula using CBCT superimposition to prevent teeth from tipping towards the extraction space.However, there is currently a paucity of comprehensive research on root-inclusive tooth movement.

Therefore, this retrospective study aims were to measure and analyze maxillary teeth crown and root movements in four-premolar extraction cases treated with clear aligners (CAs). Furthermore, we explored the influence of various clinical factors on the differences between achieved and designed tooth movements.

Materials and methods

This retrospective study included 47 patients (average age 22.2 ± 8.0 years) who were treated in our orthodontic department of the Hospital of Stomatology, the Fourth Military Medical University from January 2020 to May 2024. All patients had completed the first series of CAT (average treatment duration 40.3 ± 12.7 months). The aligner wear regimen was 7 days each for 22 hours a day, or more, as recommended. Inclusion criteria included (1) extraction of 4 first or second premolars; (2) no other maxillary tooth loss (except the third molars); (3) skeletal Class I/II malocclusion; (4) no combination with fixed/auxiliary appliances; (5) no combination with orthognathic surgery; and (6) high-quality pre/post-treatment CBCT images. A total of 542 teeth were included, consisting of 94 upper central incisors (U1), 94 upper lateral incisors (U2), 94 upper canines (U3), 81 upper second premolars (U5), 94 upper first molars (U6), and 85 upper second molars (U7). Upper first premolars (U4) were excluded due to a low count (only 13).shows the patients inclusion flowchart and baseline characteristics. Among the included patients, 3 cases received skeletal anchorage with miniscrews placed between the U5 and U6. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Stomatological Hospital of the Fourth Military Medical University (IRB-REV-2022101).

All patients underwent pre/post-treatment CBCT (KaKo Kerr, Orange, CA, USA) in the intercuspal position. The CBCT scanner (KaKo Kerr, Orange, CA, USA) settings were: FOV 23 cm × 17 cm, exposure 37.1 mAs, 17.8 s scan at 120 kV, axial slice thickness and voxel size 0.15 mm, resolution 768 pixels × 768 pixels. This resolution enables high-precision visualization of teeth and bone structures, which fully meets the requirements of this study. All CBCT images were reviewed by an experienced professional to confirm clear tooth and bone margins, intact anatomical structures, and overall image clarity without blurring or ghosting.

3D superimposition and measurements were performed using Dolphin software (v11.95; Dolphin Imaging and Management Solutions, Chatsworth, CA, USA). One experienced professional carried out all the operations, and repeated the measurements one week later.

The pre-treatment 3D coordinate system was set up following the Feng et al method.The horizontal plane was parallel to the maxillary functional occlusal plane; the sagittal plane to the midpalatal suture and nasal septum; the coronal plane, perpendicular to the horizontal and sagittal planes, passing through U7’s distal prominent point. The x-axis was the intersection of the horizontal and coronal planes; the y-axis of the sagittal and coronal planes; the z-axis of the horizontal and sagittal planes (A).

Next, maxillary pre- and post-treatment models were superimposed. First, 4 reference points (the bilateral frontomaxillary sutures and infraorbital foramina) were used for rough alignment (B). Then, a finely aligned area on the superimposed models was framed, with boundaries set as follows: upper past sella turcica's upper edge, lower above root apex, anterior not exceeding nasion, posterior behind maxilla's posterior edge, and left/right within bilateral mandibular condyles (C). After superimposition, the pre-treatment model's coordinate system was transferred to the post-treatment one.

Subsequently, each tooth's crown and root displacement were measured. The coordinates of the midpoint of the incisal edge of the incisor, the cusp of the canine, the buccal cusp of the premolar and the mesiobuccal cusp of the molar were defined as (x1, y1, z1), and those of the corresponding root apex were defined as (x2, y2, z2) (D). If the cusp was worn flat, the worn-surface midpoint was regarded as the cusp. The pre- and post-treatment z-axis value difference was defined as the anteroposterior displacement (APD), the x-axis difference as lateral displacement (LD), and the y-axis difference as occlusal-gingival displacement (OGD). In APD, incisor retraction, canine distal displacement and posterior tooth mesial displacement were positive. In LD, incisor distal displacement and canine and posterior tooth buccal displacement were positive. In OGD, tooth intrusion was positive. Finally, the achieved tooth movements were compared with ClinCheck designs to assess correlations between designed tooth movements, age, different premolar extractions, anchorage methods, extraction-space closing patterns and attachment types with designed-achieved discrepancies.

Statistical analysis

Sample size was calculated using G*Power (v3.1.9.7; HHU, Düsseldorf, GER). Based on Dai et al,the smallest effect size (0.37) was observed during U1 OGD. Assuming a type I error of 0.05 and a power of 0.80, the minimum sample size for teeth was calculated to be 60. In the present study, the bilateral maxillary teeth of 47 patients were measured, with a sample size ranging from 81 to 94, meeting the study requirement.

Statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS (v26.0; IBM, Armonk, NY). The intra-operator consistency was evaluated using the Pearson correlation coefficient. The Shapiro-Wilk test was employed to evaluate samples’ normality. In cases with a normal distribution, a paired-sample-test was utilized to compare the designed and achieved tooth movements. Conversely, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was performed. The influencing factors of designed-achieved discrepancies were analyzed using a linear mixed-effects model, with differences between patients as random effects.

Results

and, andpresent designed-achieved discrepancies for anteriors. Considering APD, prescribed root retraction was underachieved, with U3 crowns showing 71.5% of planned distal movement. In relation to LD, U2 distal angulation occurred, despite designed parallel movement. Instead of designed lingual movement, U3, as a whole, exhibited buccal displacement with greater displacement of the crown than that of the root, indicating buccal inclination. As for the OGD, although anteriors were designed for intrusion, they achieved extrusion.

and, andpresent designed-achieved discrepancies for posteriors. Considering APD, all crowns and roots exceeded the designed mesial displacement except for the mesiobuccal root of U7. Actual root displacement was smaller for crowns (contrary to the designed displacement), resulting in mesial tipping. In relation to LD, U5-6 exhibited lingual movement with buccal inclination, while U7 showed lingual inclination. As for the OGD, U5 demonstrated over-intrusion and U7 over-extrusion, with no significant difference in U6 (= .28).

,,andillustrate the effects of designed tooth movements, age, different premolar extractions, anchorage methods, extraction-space closing patterns and attachment types on the designed-achieved discrepancies for U1, U3 and U6. Designed tooth movements affected all discrepancies except the U1 crown APD/LD and U6 OGD. Adolescents showed greater discrepancies in OGD and U1 crown APD. For U6 root LD, adults moved more lingually than designed, while adolescents moved more buccally. The U5 extraction group demonstrated greater discrepancies vs U4 group in U1 root APD, U6 APD, U3 crown APD/OGD and U3 root LD, but reduced U3 crown LD discrepancies. In APD, Class II elastics reduced discrepancies in U1/U3 crowns compared to the no extra-anchorage group, while miniscrews decreased U3 crown discrepancies but increased U1 root discrepancies. Regarding LD, Class II elastics caused greater buccal movement in U3 crowns/U6 roots than in the no extra-anchorage group, while miniscrews induced more buccal movement in U6 roots. Sequential retraction increased U1 crown APD discrepancies, while en-masse reduced U6 crown LD discrepancies. Vertical attachments in U3 caused greater root APD discrepancies in U1/U3 vs optimized attachments. Compared to U6 optimized attachments, double-rectangular attachments reduced U6 root APD discrepancies and horizontal attachments, and no-attachment decreased U6 crown LD discrepancies.

Discussion

While previous studies reported that designed crowns movement was often unachievable,,,root movement discrepancies remain unexplored, to the best of our knowledge. Therefore, the present study analyzed designed-achieved discrepancies of both crowns and roots, and their influencing factors in premolar extraction cases.

It is considered challenging to achieve an adequate moment-to-force ratio for bodily or controlled root movement of anterior teeth in CAT.In our study, despite greater posterior displacements designed for roots than crowns to counteract torque loss, actual root movements remained lower than 1 mm. The maximum discrepancy occurred at U1 root (5.49 ± 2.30 mm). While incisor crown retraction matched the design, U3 crowns achieved only 71.5% of the designed movement. Four key factors may contribute to the above phenomena: (1) the indirect torque transmission mechanism of CAs may have caused inefficient root control during retraction; (2) U1′s arch-terminal position intensifies the bowing effects,which specifically manifests as lingual inclination and extrusion of the incisors; (3) overall retraction resistance is greater in U3 due to its thicker and longer roots compared to U1; and (4) additionally, the designed crown-root movement differential in U3 is greater than that in U1. These factors might have contributed to insufficient root control and torque loss during anterior retraction, especially in U1. Therefore, it is recommended to incorporate root movement and torque overcorrection in ClinCheck. Palone et al have compared planned and actual tooth movements, suggesting that a 32.8% overcorrection should be included for the buccolingual inclination of maxillary incisors.A finite element study by Liu et al demonstrated that in models with first premolar extraction, overcorrection can produce palatal root torque and intrusion of incisors. With canine attachments, a 1.2° overcorrection can enable bodily retraction of U1.However, few studies have verified the actual effectiveness of overcorrection in initial treatment planning. Therefore, further research is needed to confirm the role of overcorrection in improving the predictability of tooth movement. In addition to overcorrection, other auxiliary methods have also been proven to be effective in improving root movement and torque control. Studies have shown that fixed orthodontic treatment provides better torque control than CAs.Consequently, some scholars have adopted a combined approach of fixed and CAT for correcting pre-treatment root tip inclination or deep overbite, achieving favorable clinical outcomes.Furthermore, miniscrew implantation in the anterior region has also been confirmed as an effective means of controlling anterior tooth torque.

Unlike anterior teeth, mesial movement of posterior teeth roots closely matched the predictions. This is likely due to the posterior maxilla's lower bone density,possibly facilitating faster bone remodeling and more favorable root movement. Furthermore, 28 patients used auxiliary anchorage devices, which supported the limited desired movement of the posterior anchor teeth. In addition, the anterior roots had far more designed retraction than the posteriors, which might have also contributed to the better match between designed and achieved displacements. The present study also found that posterior roots showed smaller designed-achieved mesial movement discrepancies than crowns, possibly because ClinCheck plans set greater mesial movement for roots than crowns to counteract the tendency of mesial tipping. However, actual anchorage control was insufficient, resulting in posterior mesial tipping. Dai et al found that U6 mesially moved 2.8 mm, despite being set stable.Liu et al found that in cases with first molar extraction, the anchorage preservation effect of indirect strong anchorage (the second premolars are fixed by metallic ligation) was superior to that of direct strong anchorage (the anterior teeth are retracted by elastics), but it was accompanied by a tendency toward deep overbite.Therefore, clinical practice requires a reasonable trade-off between these two effects.

In LD, similar amounts of distal movement were designed for U1 and U2 crowns and roots, respectively. U1 showed near-zero movement due to its central anterior arch position, while U2 had less root distal movement than crowns, causing distal tipping, indicating U2 needs greater distal root movement design. Yan et al reached the same conclusion, finding that in CAT with premolar-extraction treatment, U2 are prone to distal tipping. This phenomenon can be alleviated by adding attachments and adopting the method of sequential anterior retraction.Previous study found U3 lingual inclination during extraction-space closure, with root-cortical contact possibly impeding root retraction.Nevertheless, these conclusions need further verification as prior studies only measured crown angulation, ignoring root movement. In contrast, Dai et al found root buccal expansion efficiency was significantly lower than crowns despite similar designs.This result is similar to our findings which showed U3 is actually buccally inclined, suggesting that U3 may not be prone to lingual inclination due to limited root movement. However, this conclusion needs further validation via root movement studies. In the present study, U5 and U6 both had buccal inclination, possibly due to delayed displacement during rapid extraction-space closure.Therefore, it is recommended to preset additional posterior root buccal torque in ClinCheck to counteract this phenomenon.

In OGD, anteriors extruded, despite designed intrusion and lingual inclination of incisors can also cause extrusion.Deep overbite not only affects aesthetics but, more importantly, restricts the torque expression of the upper anterior teeth and exacerbates posterior-anchorage loss.Therefore, strict overbite control is required during premolar-extraction with CAs. In clinical practice, it is generally recommended to design the following in ClinCheck software for overbite overcorrection: anterior edge-to-edge occlusion or slight open bite; interproximal reduction; reverse Spee curve in the mandibular arch; enhanced posterior occlusal contacts; and optimized deep bite attachments or horizontal rectangular attachments on premolars. Additionally, anterior bite ramps or chewies can be used as auxiliary tools.Furthermore, although it is generally believed in clinical practice that the ‘bite-block effect’ of CAs can lead to posterior tooth intrusion, only U5 were observed to have intruded in the present study. In fact, existing research has already confirmed that CAs do not possess the ‘bite-block effect’.Research by Harris et al concluded that the occurrence of the ‘bite-block effect’ is usually associated with posterior blocks with a thickness of at least 3-4 mm.Such a thickness is sufficient to exceed the patient's freeway space, thereby exerting a continuous intrusive effect on posterior teeth, while the thickness of CAs might have otherwise been insufficient to trigger this effect. The absence of intrusion in U6 in this study suggests that the ‘bite-block effect’ may not exist, and the intrusion of U5 might have been caused by tooth inclination, rather than an absolute intrusion.

Analyses of influencing factors for designed-achieved discrepancy of U1, U3 and U6 showed that designed movements did not significantly impact U1 crown APD/LD or U6 OGD. The designed-achieved discrepancies of U1 APD and U6 OGD were not significant, indicating reasonable predictability of these movements. As U1 crown is located in the central anterior arch, adjacent to the contralateral homonymous tooth, its transverse displacement error may be primarily constrained by inherent arch morphology, independent of the designed amount.

Adolescents showed greater U1 APD crown but no root difference, indicating relatively better torque control than in adults, consistent with the findings of Dai et al.Interestingly, for U6 LD, adult roots moved more lingually and adolescent roots moved more buccally than predicted. Adolescent maxillary growth (forward, downward, widening), combined with CAs limiting crown but not root widening, may have caused U6 buccal root displacement and lingual inclination. Research has shown that adolescents are more prone to physiological anchorage loss.Although adolescent maxillary growth theoretically should increase molar APD differences, our results showed no significant difference, suggesting that maxillary molar lingual inclination potentially protects anchorage. Additionally, maxillary growth downward led to greater adolescent crown OGD differences. Therefore, adolescent orthodontic treatment should leverage jawbone growth potential, optimize molar lingual inclination to augment anchorage and adopt dynamic vertical control designs.

The U5 extraction group had greater APD differences in U1 roots, U3 crowns and U6 than the U4 extraction group. U1 was prone to uncontrolled tipping movement. Horizontally, U3 crowns had smaller LD differences and roots larger ones, causing U3 lingual inclination. Overall, these findings suggest U5 extraction is more likely to cause anchorage loss. Clinically, it is necessary to reinforce posterior anchorage design and increase incisor root lingual overcorrection to offset movement deviations.

Class II elastics and miniscrews have been reported to protect maxillary molar anchorage,which aligns with our findings. In APD, designed-achieved crown discrepancy trends for U1, U3 and U6 was miniscrew group < Class II elastic group < no extra-anchorage group. Notably, U1 root APD discrepancy was greater in the miniscrew group, likely due to elastic force from the miniscrew to precision-cut on U3 causing greater U1 clockwise torque and labial root movement. This result is consistent with the findings of Liu et al, who observed that when direct strong anchorage was used, the center of rotation of the U1 was closer to the crowns, and the lingual root control effect was weaker than that of moderate anchorage, which in turn was weaker than that of indirect strong anchorage.Therefore, for cases requiring a higher level of root movement control for the U1, the use of indirect strong anchorage is recommended, while methods for deep overbite correction should be used concurrently. To avoid this outcome, placing power arms on U3 can direct the line of force closer to the resistance center. Horizontally, U6 roots in the extra-anchorage groups moved more buccally, with the miniscrew group showing maximum buccal movement. These findings confirm anchorage protection by Class II elastics and miniscrews. Class II elastics are considered to cause U3 lingual inclination in fixed orthodontics. However, our study showed U3 crown moved more buccally, with no significant root difference in Class II elastic group, possibly due to CA wrapping around teeth combined with elastic anchorage protection enabling uniform force distribution and expressed U3 buccal crown torque. Further research is needed to confirm this assertion.

Some scholars believe that sequential movement can enhance anterior control by expanding appliance coverage. The present study showed sequential retraction significantly reduced U1 crown retraction compared to en-masse retraction, with no root displacement difference, indicating less U1 torque loss. En-masse retraction resulted in greater U6 crown lingual displacement compared to sequential retraction. Although there was no significant difference, U6 anterior movement was reduced, implying lower anchorage consumption. This result suggests that improved torque control increases anchorage demand. Therefore, for precise torque control, it is preferred to adopt sequential retraction to minimize U1 labial inclination, combined with enhanced posterior anchorage design.

Power ridges have been suggested to provide additional torque compensation for the lingual root torque of anteriors.However, Rajan et al found that the use of power ridges had no significant effect on the accuracy of torque achievement of U1.Ren et al also reported that power ridges did not affect the lingual inclination, extrusion, or retraction of U1.These findings are consistent with those of the present study, namely that power ridges had no impact on the 3D movement of U1. U3 plays a crucial role in incisor retraction anchorage.Compared to optimized attachments, U3 vertical attachments caused greater U1 and U3 root APD discrepancies, along with uncontrolled tipping. This finding contrasts with the results of Ren et alwho found vertical attachments on U3 favored labial incisor inclination – possibly because they focused on crowns and ignored roots. Therefore, we recommend prioritizing optimized attachments over vertical ones to precisely control U3 root displacement and prevent uncontrolled U1 tipping. Additionally, we found double-rectangular attachments effectively controlled U6 root mesial movement compared to optimized attachments. Regarding LD, the no-attachment and horizontal attachment groups had greater U6 crown buccal movement, indicating a higher risk of anchorage loss. However, the small sample size for each attachment type may have influenced the accuracy of the results.

This study had a number of limitations. First, the small sample size resulted in a limited number of teeth in certain factor-based subgroup (eg, only 6 U6 teeth without attachments and 3 patients with miniscrews), which may have led to inaccurate analysis of influential factors in these subgroups, potentially missing true influential factors or misidentifying non-influential ones as influential. Second, our study only analyzed 3D linear movements. Future research should compare designed and achieved angulation and inclination for validation of the findings.

Conclusions

1.

In premolar-extraction cases with CAs, tooth movement (especially root control) was suboptimal.

2.

Limited root movement and high crown expansion efficiency make U3 less prone to lingual inclination.

3.

Adolescent maxillary growth potential can optimize anchorage via U6 lingual inclination.

4.

U5 extraction caused more anterior uncontrolled tipping and anchorage loss than U4.

5.

Miniscrews and Class II elastics protect molar anchorage and aid anterior retraction. However, miniscrews may induce U1 root labial inclination.

6.

Sequential movement reduced U1 labial inclination but compromises anchorage protection.

7.

U3 vertical attachments exacerbate uncontrolled movement of U1/U3 roots.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of The Fourth Military Medical University (IRB-REV-2022101). Informed consent was obtained from the participant.

Consent for publication

Not applicable.

Availability of data and materials

The datasets used and analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Funding

This study was supported by the National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases (LCB202202, LCB202414, LCA202403), CSA Clinical Research Fund (CSA-02022-01), New Technologies and New Business of School of Stomatology, Air Force Medical University Fund (LX2022-401, LX2023-402), China Oral Health Foundation (A2023-013), Air Force Medical University Clinical research project (2024LC2426), National Natural Science Foundation of China (8240036014), Innovation Team of the Health Commission of Shaanxi Province (2025TD-15).

Conflict of interest

None disclosed.