PMID: 39826062 | DOI: 10.1007/s10620-024-08824-9 | Source: PubMed abstract (no PMCID)
Wang J, Zhou Y, Lei D. Relationship Between Laryngopharyngeal Reflux, Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease, and Dental Erosion in Adult Populations: A Systematic Review. Dig Dis Sci. 2025;70(3):1078-1090. Epub 2025-01-18.
Article types: Journal Article; Systematic Review. MeSH: Adult; Humans; Gastroesophageal Reflux; Laryngopharyngeal Reflux; Prevalence; Tooth Erosion.

ABSTRACT
As one of the most common complications of laryngopharyngeal reflux or gastroesophageal reflux disease, dental erosion presents a significant association with laryngopharyngeal reflux. This study aimed to elucidate the role of laryngopharyngeal reflux and gastroesophageal reflux disease on the severity and occurrence of dental erosion in adult populations.
A comprehensive search was performed in PubMed/MEDLINE, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, and Scopus for English literature published from July 1999 to June 2024. Peer-reviewed publications evaluating the relationship between GERD, LPR, and dental erosion in adult populations were retrieved. Opensigle and the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform database were used to search the potential gray literature. A manual search was also performed on reference lists.
The electronic literature search yielded 1382 studies, with 22 researches in line with the inclusion criteria. Results indicated a significantly higher prevalence of dental erosion in adult populations with GERD or LPR compared to healthy populations. Subjects with dental erosion demonstrate a greater prevalence of LPR or GERD as well. The heterogeneity of the evaluation of clinical outcomes, diagnostic methods, and the definition of diseases need to be considered. Future studies should define reflux disease according to a universal guideline to better enhance treatment in adult populations.
Conclusion: GERD or LPR presents a significant association with dental erosion in adult populations. Clinicians should emphasize timely detection and management of the underlying factors of dental erosion in patients with LPR or GERD.
