Source: PubMed Central PMC9001786 — DOI 10.1186/s40729-022-00414-6

Title: Does vitamin D have an effect on osseointegration of dental implants? A systematic review
Authors: Werny JG, Sagheb K, Diaz L, Kämmerer PW, Al-Nawas B, Schiegnitz E
Journal: International Journal of Implant Dentistry, 2022 (2022-04-11)
PMID: 35403929 ; PMCID: PMC9001786 ; DOI: 10.1186/s40729-022-00414-6

== ABSTRACT ==

Purpose
The aim of this study was to systematically review the available evidence to evaluate the efficacy of vitamin D supplementation or vitamin D depletion on the osseointegration of implants in animals and humans.

Methods
The focus questions addressed were "Do vitamin D deficient subjects treated with (dental) implants have an inferior osseointegration than subjects with adequate serum vitamin D level?" and "Do vitamin D supplemented subjects treated with (dental) implants have a superior osseointegration than subjects with adequate serum vitamin D level?" Humans and animals were considered as subjects in this study. Databases were searched from 1969 up to and including March 2021 using different combination of the following terms: "implant", "bone to implant contact", "vitamin D" and "osseointegration". Letters to the editor, historic reviews, commentaries and articles published in languages other than English and German were excluded. The pattern of the present systematic review was customize to primarily summarize the pertinent data.

Results
Thirteen experimental studies with animals as subject, two clinical studies and three case reports, with humans as subjects, were included. The amount of inserted titanium implants ranged between 24 and 1740. Results from three animal studies showed that vitamin D deficiency has a negative effect on new bone formation and/or bone to implant contact (BIC). Eight animal studies showed that vitamin D supplementation has a enhancing effect on BIC and/or new bone formation around implants. Furthermore, enhancing the impact of vitamin D supplementation on the osseointegration of implants in subjects with diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis and chronic kidney disease (CKD) were assessed. Studies and case reports involving human subjects showed that patients with a low serum vitamin D level have a higher tendency to exhibit an early dental implant failure. When supplemented with vitamin D the osseointegration was successful in the case reports and a beneficial impact on the changes in the bone level during the osseointegration were determined.

Conclusions
Vitamin D deficiency seems to have a negative effect on the osseointegration of implants in animals. The supplementation of vitamin D appears to improve the osseointegration in animals with systemic diseases, such as vitamin D deficiency, diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and CKD. Slight evidence supports the hypothesis that humans similarly benefit from vitamin D supplementation in terms of osseointegration. Further investigation is required to maintain these assumptions.

== FULL TEXT ==

Introduction

Successful osseointegration is one of the key criteria for a prosperous dental implant therapy which is achieved by a functional ankylosis. The foreign material and vital bone grow together as a functional unit which is characterized as the initial newly created bone to implant contact (BIC). New bone formation can be both enhanced or decelerated due to vitamin D, depending on its level. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with a variety of diseases, such as parodontitis, early tooth loss, a catabolic metabolism, osteoporotic fractures and compromised fracture healing. Vitamin D is a steroid hormone which can be synthesized in the skin when sun irradiation is sufficient (290–315 nm) and successfully converted in the liver and kidneys. Sufficient sun irradiation is only available in months from April until September northern 40° N latitude, which is northern from Madrid. Therefore, most humans living in Europe, northern Asia and North America are not adequately supplied with vitamin D throughout the year from sunlight alone. Vitamin D is additionally contained in nourishment, such as oily fish, liver (beef), eggs, milk, cheese soy and mushrooms. It plays an important role in the mineral homeostasis by stimulating intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate. It also regulates the bone metabolism and bone mineralization by activating osteoclasts and osteoblasts.

Vitamin D is available in different sources and, therefore, has different versions. Ergocalciferol (Vitamin D2) is the versions contained in plants and Cholecalciferol (Vitamin D3) in animals and humans. There are also active and inactive versions of vitamin D depending on the way of hydroxylation. For laboratory measurements 25 (OH) vitamin D status is determined, since it is a metabolite with a high concentration and a relatively long half-life. The active version, however, is 1,25 (OH) vitamin D. Since the laboratory measurement detects only the level of 25 (OH) vitamin D and solely in the bloodstream it is not a perfectly accurate method to measure all disposable vitamin D inside the body. However, it is a good measurement of the available vitamin D in the bloodstream and the established marker of vitamin D status.

Schulze-Späte et al. assessed the biological effect of systemic vitamin D supplementation on bone cells. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical investigation showed that patients supplemented with vitamin D demonstrate a higher osteoclast activity compared with control. Both positive and negative effects of vitamin D supplementation on BIC have been mentioned in the previous literature. Liu et al. and Zhou et al. for instance showed a significant enhanced bone volume and osseointegration compared with control. However, Naito et al. and Akhavan et al. did not show a significant effect of vitamin D supplementation in terms of increased BIC. Concerning vitamin D deficiency, all studies showed a significant decreasing BIC or new bone formation compared to control or vitamin D supplemented rats. There seems to be a disagreement over the efficacy of vitamin D supplementation concerning the augmenting BIC. Hence the aim of this study was to systematically review the available evidence to evaluate the efficacy of vitamin D supplementation or vitamin D depletion on the osseointegration of implants.

Materials and methods

Focused questions
Based on PRISMA guidelines, two particular questions were created according to the PICO principle:
(1) Do vitamin D deficient subjects treated with (dental) implants have an inferior osseointegration than subjects with adequate serum vitamin D level?
(2) Do vitamin D supplemented subjects treated with (dental) implants have a superior osseointegration than subjects with adequate serum vitamin D level?
Participants (P): subjects (animals or humans) having undergone implant treatment.
Interventions (I): effect of vitamin D deficiency / supplementation on osseointegration.
Control (C): osseointegration with adequate vitamin D serum level.
Outcome measures (O): bone to implant contact (BIC), new bone formation (NBF) and/or implant resistance, bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV) around implants with and without vitamin D deficiency / supplementation.

Eligibility criteria: (a) original studies or case reports (clinical and experimental), (b) inclusion of a control group, (c) intervention: effect of vitamin D supplementation/deficiency on osseointegration, (d) conservative non-intervention studies, (e) studies published in English and German. Letters to the editor, historic reviews and commentaries excluded.

Literature search protocol: PubMed/Medline, Cochrane library and Google-Scholar searched from 1969 to March 2021 using combinations of "implant", "bone to implant contact", "vitamin D" and "osseointegration". The initial search yielded 60 studies. Forty-two studies which did not fulfill the eligibility criteria were excluded. In total, 18 experimental and non-intervention clinical studies and case reports were included and processed for data extraction.

Results

Results of studies carried out with animals

General characteristics
The majority of the studies were performed with animals. One study was performed with mice. Eight studies were performed with rats, of which six studies involved only one sex (male three times, female three times); in two studies the sex was not reported. Three studies included rabbits (one with females only). One study was performed with dogs. In almost all animal studies Ti implants were used; one study used Demineralized Allogeneic Bone Matrix (DABM) as implant material. The number of inserted implants ranged between 24 and 168 (not reported in two studies). Dimensions (diameter × length in mm) ranged between 1 × 2, 6.25 × 2 and 1.4 × 23. Implants were placed in tibia (seven studies), femur (four studies) and jaw (one study); in one study (Vandersteenhoven) implantation was subcutaneous in abdominal sites. Follow-up period ranged between 1 and 8 weeks. In four studies vitamin D coated and non-coated implants were evaluated. The effect of vitamin D supplementation on osseointegration was assessed in ovariectomized rats, diabetic rats, nephrectomized mice and vitamin D deficient rats.

Assessment of osseointegration
Histological analysis was used in eleven studies. In six studies implant resistance was assessed by biomechanical tests. In three studies new bone formation was assessed using 3D micro-CT; two studies used conventional 2D radiography. Histomorphometry was used in seven studies; SEM in two studies. Wound fluid analysis was performed in the study by Satué et al. to assess cellular activity during osseointegration. Serum vitamin D level was measured in one study.

Main outcome
Three animal studies showed that vitamin D deficiency declined new bone formation and/or BIC around implants. Eight studies involving animals adequately provided with vitamin D showed that vitamin D supplementation enhanced new bone formation and/or BIC around implants. Four studies reported no statistically significant differences in BIC and/or new bone formation around vitamin D coated implants or systemic vitamin D supplementation. Diabetic rats had an improved osseointegration when treated with insulin. Additional vitamin D supplementation enhanced new bone formation around implants in diabetic rats, while vitamin D supplementation alone had no significant statistical effect. A different study reported significantly enhanced new bone formation and BIC in nephrectomized mice when supplemented with vitamin D. Significant improvement in implant resistance and bone area density was achieved in ovariectomized rats after treatment with a combination of vitamin D and Alendronate.

Results of clinical studies

General characteristics
Humans were subjects in two studies and three case reports. The case reports were developed with male patients only. In all studies and case reports, humans had undergone dental implant treatment with Ti or TiZr implants. The number of inserted implants ranged between 4 and 1740. Dimensions (diameter × length in mm) ranged between 3.3 × 8, 4.1 × 12 and 4.3 × 7. Follow-up period ranged between 12 weeks and 7 months. One study evaluated the effect of vitamin D supplementation on changes in bone level at the implant site during osseointegration. A different study aimed to discover the ratio of early dental implant failures (EDIF = failure within 4 months after placement, before connection of the prosthetic abutment) in correlation with serum 25 (OH) vitamin D level. The effect of vitamin D supplementation on osseointegration was assessed in human patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or vitamin D deficiency by the case reports.

Assessment of osseointegration
Kwiatek et al. used conventional 2D radiography to verify implant osseointegration and assess changes in post-surgical crestal bone levels; they also used ISQ (Implant Stability Quotient) measurement to assess implant stability. Serum vitamin D level was measured in four studies.

Main outcome
Two case reports with human subjects described three patients losing their dental implant while having a vitamin D deficiency. Mangano et al. discovered that patients with a low serum vitamin D level have a higher tendency to exhibit an EDIF. Kwiatek et al. showed that vitamin D supplementation has an increasing influence on the change of bone level around dental implants. Fretwurst et al. reported two cases in which vitamin D deficient patients were successfully treated with dental implants after one or two consecutive dental implant failures, due to vitamin D supplementation. Flanagan et al. reported one case in which a patient with ESRD was successfully treated with dental implants due to vitamin D supplementation and additional medication.

Discussion

From the literature reviewed, 18 studies fulfilled the eligibility criteria; results from all animal studies which compared vitamin D deficient to non-deficient subjects showed that BIC or new bone formation declined. According to the Institute of Medicine (IOM) approximately 20–100% of adult women and men living in northern Europe and North America appear to have vitamin D deficiency. Therefore, this finding seems to have high clinical relevance on dental treatment in these regions.

The result from 75% of the studies showed that systemic vitamin D supplementation enhanced new bone formation around dental implants. However, Pimentel et al. and Akhavan et al. showed no significant difference of new bone formation or BIC in subjects with systemic vitamin D supplementation. Pimentel et al. was the only study with healthy systematically vitamin D supplemented animals. The supplementation of healthy subjects with vitamin D has only a weak improving effect. Vitamin D sufficient or insufficient patients benefit less from vitamin D supplementation than deficient patients. In healthy patients a high-dose vitamin D supplementation can cause a lower bone mineral density.

Two studies assessed the effect of vitamin D supplementation on osseointegration of diabetic rats. Both could not show a statistically significant difference between vitamin D supplemented and not supplemented rats regarding BIC and new bone formation. The combined treatment of insulin and vitamin D supplementation led to a significantly higher BIC and BA compared to untreated diabetic rats, with similar results to healthy controls. The supplementation of vitamin D in pre-diabetic, vitamin D deficient patients could reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes by 62%.

The period of vitamin D supplementation in the animal studies ranged between 7 days post-surgery and 8 weeks pre-surgery plus 4 weeks post-surgery. Most studies started post-surgery; only three started pre-surgery. Dvorak et al. discovered that the deficient group had significantly less cortical BIC compared to the group supplemented 8 weeks pre-surgery and 14 days post-surgery; a different group supplemented 14 days pre- and post-surgery had no significant change in BIC, however the BV/TV was significantly decreased compared to the two other groups. Nakamura et al. could not show a statistically significant difference between pre-surgery or post-surgery supplemented ovariectomized rats. Neither in animals nor in humans is there a common recommendation on how and when to supplement or measure the 25 (OH) vitamin D level.

Analog to animals, humans also showed a negative effect of low vitamin D levels on the osseointegration of dental implants. Mangano et al. discovered that the number of EDIFs has a tendency to increase when patients show lower vitamin D levels. This finding leads to the hypothesis that humans, similar to animals, may also have an inferior osseointegration of implants due to vitamin D deficiency. Furthermore, Kwiatek et al. showed that systemic vitamin D supplementation enhanced new bone formation around dental implants. This result is similar to most animal studies and is slight evidence for a commonality with animals. All case reports support the assumption that human beings have comparable symptoms when vitamin D deficient, and supplementation seems to reduce these symptoms.

Only 50% of the animal studies showed that local vitamin D supplementation enhanced the bone to implant contact. The other two studies did not show significant difference in BIC, though on a cellular level there was a certain difference. Satué et al. reported a significantly higher level of LDH around implants coated with a high dose of UV-irradiated vitamin D precursor and vitamin E compared to control; the low-dosed coated implants had a significantly higher level of ALP (alkaline phosphatase) and osteocalcin. These results suggest that different concentrations of implant coatings have oppositional effects on the surrounding bone tissue.

The majority of the studies which assessed the effect of vitamin D deficiency or supplementation on osteogenesis around implants were performed in animals, and the methods varied remarkably. Micro-CTs have higher resolution than computed tomography used for patients and can measure bone mineral density. Histological analysis continues to be the gold standard for assessing bone formation on a cellular basis.

Due to the very short follow-up period of the animal studies (up to 12 weeks) only little is known about the long-term effects of vitamin D supplementation on implant survival rate. Further studies are necessary to evaluate long-term effects on implant survival. Animals with systemic diseases such as diabetes, osteoporosis and CKD had great benefit in BIC and/or new bone formation after combined treatment with their standard medication plus vitamin D supplementation. Longitudinal, randomized controlled trials with humans are needed.

Since there was only a small number of studies, their results imply only weak evidence of improvement in osseointegration due to vitamin D supplementation in humans. The case reports investigating the effect of vitamin D on osseointegration in humans have a high risk of bias. Especially the effect of vitamin D supplementation on osseointegration in patients with diseases such as diabetes, osteoporosis, vitamin D deficiency and kidney diseases remains widely unknown.

Conclusions

Within the limitations of this systematic review, it is concluded that vitamin D deficiency seems to have a negative effect on the osseointegration of implants in animals. The supplementation of vitamin D appears to enhance the osseointegration in animals with systemic diseases such as vitamin D deficiency, diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis and CKD. The effect of vitamin D coated implants on osseointegration remains controversial. Only slight evidence supports the hypothesis that humans similarly benefit from vitamin D supplementation in terms of osseointegration. Further investigations on the effect of vitamin D on osseointegration of dental implants in humans are required.
