1. J Prosthodont. 2018 Feb;27(2):101-107. doi: 10.1111/jopr.12647. Epub 2017 Nov 
16.

Clinical and Radiologic Outcomes of Submerged and Nonsubmerged Bone-Level 
Implants with Internal Hexagonal Connections in Immediate Implantation: A 5-Year 
Retrospective Study.

Wu S(1), Wu X(1), Shrestha R(1), Lin J(2), Feng Z(3), Liu Y(1), Shi Y(1), Huang 
B(1), Li Z(1), Liu Q(1), Zhang X(4), Hu M(4), Chen Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Implantology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of 
Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Stomatology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Xiamen Stomatological Hospital, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(3)Department of Orthodontics, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of 
Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Stomatology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Guangzhou Shangde Dental Clinic, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the 5-year clinical and radiologic outcome of immediate 
implantation using submerged and nonsubmerged techniques with bone-level 
implants and internal hexagonal connections and the effects of potential 
influencing factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 114 bone-level implants (XiVE S plus) with 
internal hexagonal connections inserted into 72 patients were included. Patients 
were followed up for 5 years. A t-test was used to statistically evaluate the 
marginal bone loss between the submerged and nonsubmerged groups. The cumulative 
survival rate (CSR) was calculated according to the life table method and 
illustrated with Kaplan-Meier survival curves. Comparisons of the CSR between 
healing protocols, guided bone regeneration, implants with different sites, 
lengths, and diameters were performed using log-rank tests.
RESULTS: The 5-year cumulative implant survival rates with submerged and 
nonsubmerged healing were 94% and 96%, respectively. No statistically 
significant differences in terms of marginal bone loss, healing protocol, 
application of guided bone regeneration, implant site, or length were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: High CSRs and good marginal bone levels were achieved 5 years after 
immediate implantation of bone-level implants with internal hexagonal 
connections using both the submerged and nonsubmerged techniques. Factors such 
as implant length, site, and application of guided bone regeneration did not 
have an impact on the long-term success of the implants.

© 2017 by the American College of Prosthodontists.

DOI: 10.1111/jopr.12647
PMID: 29143389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]