Introduction

With the aging population aging, the prevalence of dental implant procedures is steadily increasing. However, the success rate of implant restoration often depends on whether the alveolar bone volume and density in the surgical area meet the implantation standards. As is known, diseases such as osteoporosis, thyroid disease, periodontitis, and unhealthy lifestyles such as smoking and drinking may lead to bone volume reduction and affect its formation and maintenance [–]. Meanwhile, these symptoms are particularly noticeable on the alveolar bone, where the reduction of alveolar bone volume in the posterior part of the maxilla may lead to a decrease in the retention force of the complete denture supported by the implant, which in turn affects the stability and longevity of the implant []. The residual alveolar bone height (RBH) in the maxillary molar area is insufficient, which is not only related to tooth loss, alveolar bone resorption after atrophy, and absorption due to inflammation, but also to the aforementioned reasons []. Currently, the maxillary sinus floor elevation procedures is widely considered a reliable surgery that can increase RBH before dental implant placement. This surgery promotes the regeneration and reconstruction of bone by implanting bone graft materials under the floor bone membrane, increasing the height and density of the floor bone, thus providing enough bone volume and space for implantation.

In recent years, with the development of bone regeneration medical materials, significant progress has been made in the applications of oral and facial functional and aesthetic reconstruction. Currently, bone substitutes can be divided into autologous bone, allogeneic bone, and xenogenic bone according to their sources []. Autologous bone, due to its ideal characteristics in bone generation, conduction, and induction, remains the “gold standard” for bone defect repair. However, it still has issues such as large surgical trauma, bone source limitations, easy influence of bone regeneration speed, and high complications in the donor area [–]. Therefore, allografts and xenografts as bone substitutes have gradually attracted attention in research and application. They can effectively overcome the shortcomings of autologous bone grafting, such as donor site complications and bone source limitations, but still exist some problems and challenges. The occurrence of immune rejection is often one of the common causes of bone graft failure. In order to reduce the risk of immune rejection, decalcification/deproteinization treatment is often adopted to reduce the hardness and fragility of bone tissue and its immunogenicity. Deproteinized bovine bone matrix (DBBM) is a type of bone substitute material obtained by treating bovine bone tissue with deproteinization. It has good biocompatibility and bone conduction properties. Among them, Bio-oss is a globally widely applied and recognized DBBM material in the field of oral bone regeneration [,]. Its excellent bone induction effect makes it have effective and predictable clinical effects in bone regeneration, and it can provide a microenvironment conducive to cell proliferation and differentiation, thereby accelerating the process of bone regeneration [,].

In addition, for further improving the bone regeneration ability of bone substitutes in bone defect repair, researchers have been committed to exploring novel biological preparations. Among them, platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is a promising biological preparation, which is extracted from the patients'own blood through methods such as centrifugation. Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) is a biologically derived fibrin matrix that is obtained through a second-generation centrifugation process of blood without the addition of anticoagulants. They are rich in various growth factors such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and epidermal growth factor (EGF), which have the potential to promote the regeneration of bone, vascular and soft tissues []. The biological activity of PRP/PRF can promote bone and cartilage regeneration, and further accelerate the healing process of bone defects.

In bone defect repair, Bio-Oss + PRP/PRF can be used as a commonly used combination of bone repair materials, with good biocompatibility, biological activity, and bone induction ability. Recently, the combination of Bio-Oss + PRP/PRF has received extensive attention in maxillary sinus lifting surgeries. Xuan et al. [] found that in canine maxillary sinus lifting surgeries, the application of PRF as an adjuvant to Bio-Oss granules resulted in more obvious new bone formation at the maxillary transplant site. de Almeida Malzoni et al. [] found that the combined use of Bio-Oss and leukocyte-PRF (L-PRF) could promote new bone formation and accelerate bone maturation by increasing the expression of VEGF, RUNX2, and OCN, thus achieving the goal of early implantation of dental implants, and also reducing the number of bone transplant materials needed for filling maxillary sinuses. Despite the promising results, the evidence regarding the efficacy of platelet-derived enhancers in sinus augmentation is still inconsistent. Some studies report significant improvements in bone regeneration and implant success, while others show negligible differences when compared to using DBBM alone.

The primary objective of this study is to elucidate the impact of platelet-derived bone enhancers, namely PRP, PRF and PRGF, when used as adjuncts to DBBM in the maxillary sinus floor elevation procedure, on bone neoformation, implant stability and survival rates, and the graft resorption.

Materials and methods

This study was conducted and reported according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist [], which is presented in Appendix 1.

Data source and study searching

Three electronic databases, including the PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Web of Science (WoS), Scopus, and Google Scholar, were independently searched by two individual authors, from the inception to February 2025. The following keywords were used for study searching, such as “maxillary sinus floor elevation”, “deproteinized bovine bone matrix”, “platelet-rich plasma”, “platelet-rich fibrin”, “platelet-rich growth factor”, “concentrated growth factors”, “PRP”, “PRF”, “CGF”, and “PRGF”, with a method of combination of subject and free terms. Additionally, we also reviewed the references lists of the screened studies, to identify all potentially related studies.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria

All records retrieved from the databases were further screened by two authors to assess the eligibility for inclusion. The criteria for study inclusion were as follow: (1) studies specifically involved delayed implant placement (i.e., two-stage surgery) with a defined interval between maxillary sinus augmentation and implant insertion, or reported outcomes for a two-stage surgery subgroup separately with complete data, even if the study included mixed protocols; (2) studies assessed the effect of platelet-derived bone enhancers, either PRP or PRF, as an adjuvant material for DBBM; (3) clinical studies designed as randomized controlled trials (RCTs), case-control studies, clinical controlled trials (CCTs), and cohort studies.

Studies meeting the following criteria were excluded: (1) studies not for maxillary sinus floor augmentation; (2) pre-clinical experimental studies to evaluate the effect of PRP/PRF/PRGF on maxillary sinus augmentation; (3) studies designed as case series, literature review, systematic review/meta analysis, comment, and letter to editors. (4) duplicated studies.

Study selecting

Two authors independently screened all electronic records, and selected the related studies according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Initially, they excluded the duplicated records across six databases, with the aid of the EndNote version 20.2.1 (Clarivate Analytics, Philadelphia, USA). Thereafter, the title and abstract of each study were reviewed to remove the obviously non-related studies. Finally, the remained studies were assessed thoroughly after downloading the full-text articles. The screening results of the two authors were cross-checked, and the disagreements were discussed and resolved together.

Data extraction and quality assessment

Two authors independently extracted the following data items from the included studies: (1) study (S): first author’s name, publication year, country, study period, clinical trial registration, study design, and follow-up period; (2) patients (P): number of patients, age, sex, operation lateralities, smoking history, presence of co-morbidities, and alveolar ridge height; (3) intervention and comparison (I&C): treatment groups, volume of peripheral blood collected, centrifugal force, PRP/PRF/PRGF volume, dosage and particle size of DBBM, application of collagen membrane, anesthesia method, operative incision, medication after augmentation procedure, healing interval, size/number and product of implants, and size of biopsy specimen; (4) outcomes (O): implant survival, graft resorption, bone neoformation, percentage of fibrous tissue, residual graft, and immediate implant stability assessed by resonance frequency analysis (RFA). Specifically, when a study reported both one-stage and two-stage operation cohorts, we have extracted only the data related to the two-stage operation, as this is the focus of our study. The data extracted by the two authors were also cross-checked. Quality assessments of the RCTs and case-control studies were performed by the Cochrane Collaboration tool for assessing risk of bias and Newcastle–Ottawa scale (NOS), respectively.

Statistical analysis

When comparing continuous variables between two groups, such as bone neoformation, graft resorption, residual graft, percentage of fibrous tissue, and immediate implant stability assessed by RFA, mean difference (MD) and 95% confidence interval (95%CI) were selected as the effect size for meta-analysis. For comparing binary variables between two groups, such as implant survival rate, risk ratio (RR) and 95%CI were used as the effect size for meta-analysis. Heterogeneity across studies was estimated using the Ivalue, and the corresponding effect model was chosen (random-effects model if I> 50%, fixed-effects model if I< 50%).

For meta-analyses with significant heterogeneity, if three or more studies were included, sensitivity analysis was performed by sequentially excluding each study to observe the stability of the pooled results. If more than five studies were included, funnel plots were constructed, and Egger's and Begg's tests were performed to assess for potential publication bias (significant publication bias indicated byvalues less than 0.1 and 0.05, respectively). In the presence of significant publication bias, the nonparametric trim-and-fill method was used for adjustment. Subgroup analyses were conducted based on the bone enhancer types (PRP, PRF, PRGF), healing intervals between sinus augmentation and implant placement (4 m, 5 m, 6 m, 8 m) and DBBM particle sizes (0.25-1 mm, 1-2 mm). Sensitivity analysis by omitting the case-control studies was also conducted to assess the influence on the stability of pooling results.

All analyses were conducted using R language version 4.3 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria), with a significance level set at a two-tailed-value of less than 0.05.

Results

Study searching and screening

The flowchart of the study searching and selecting is presented in Fig.. The database search yielded a total of 383 records (68 from PubMed, 37 from Embase, 12 from CENTRAL, 82 from WoS, 76 from Scopus, and 108 from Google Scholar), complemented by 4 additional records from other sources, summing up to 387 literature records in total. After deduplication, which removed 155 duplicate records, 232 records remained. A preliminary screening of titles and abstracts led to the exclusion of 201 records that were clearly irrelevant. Subsequently, the 31 potentially relevant records were retrieved in full text for detailed evaluation, from which 15 were further excluded due to lack of relevance, leaving 16 studies [,–] to be included in the final analysis.

Baseline characteristics of the included studies

The baseline characteristics of the included studies are detailed in Table. The studies were designed as RCTs in 14 articles [,–,–,–] and as a case-control study in two [,]. They were configured as two-, three-, or four-arm studies in 11 [,,–,–], four [,,,], and one [] articles, respectively. A total of 372 patients and 455 surgical procedures were involved in these studies. The reported mean age ranged from 43.50 to 56.90 years, with a male percentage varying between 20.0% and 80.0%. The patient inclusion criterion for alveolar ridge height was less than 3, 4, 5, and 7 mm in three [,,], three [,,], five [,,,,], and one [] studies, respectively.

The detailed surgical protocols for maxillary sinus augmentation and implant placement are delineated in Table. Eleven studies [,,,,–] reported the volume of peripheral blood collected, which varied from 10 to 90 ml. The centrifugal force utilized for the preparation of PRP/PRF was detailed in 13 studies [,–,–], ranging between 300-580G. The dosage of DBBM was reported in seven studies [,,,,–], varying from 0.5 to 2.5 g or 1.0 to 3.0 ml. The DBBM particle size was documented as 0.25–1 mm in four studies [,,,] and 1–2 mm in five studies [,,,,]. Collagen membrane (mainly Bio-Gide®, Geistlich Pharma AG) was applied in ten studies [,,,,–,–]. Local anesthesia was administered to ensure patient comfort during the maxillary sinus augmentation procedure. The healing period between sinus augmentation and implantation was either 4, 5, 6, or 8 months. The methodologies for evaluating the graft tissue and implantation are summarized in Table. These include the follow-up period post-implantation, immediate implant stability, and volumetric and histological analyses of the graft material.

The quality assessment outcomes for the included studies are detailed in Table S1. Notably, both case-control studies [,] achieved a commendable score of 8 on the NOS. Among the 14 RCTs evaluated, four [,,,] were identified as having a high risk of bias in the allocation concealment process, and three trials [,,] exhibited a high risk of bias in the blinding of outcome assessment. Despite these identified areas of concern, the overall quality of the included studies was found to be robust, indicating a high standard of research methodology and execution.

Effect of platelet-derived bone enhancers in sinus augmentation procedure

Figuredepicts the comparative meta-analysis of bone neoformation in sinus floor elevation procedure using DBBM alone versus DBBM combined with platelet-derived bone enhancers. Results highlight a significant augmentation of the bone neoformation capacity when bone enhancers are added to the DBBM (Fig.A, MD = 5.92, 95%CI: 2.17 to 9.67,= 0.002**). Sensitivity analysis, undertaken due to noted heterogeneity, found no study significantly destabilizing the combined results (Fig.D). Sensitivity analysis by omitting the case–control study [] provided similar significant result (MD = 6.54, 95%CI: 2.36 to 10.72,= 0.002**). Publication bias assessment is non-significant, as evidenced by-values of 0.189 and 0.102 for Egger's and Begg's tests, respectively (Fig.E). Subgroup analyses were performed based on bone enhancer types (Fig.A), interval between sinus floor elevation and implant placement (Fig.B), and DBBM particle size (Fig.C). As a result, only in PRF subgroup (MD = 7.54, 95%CI: 2.94 to 12.13) and subgroups with 4 m (MD = 13.51, 95%CI: 6.87 to 20.14) or 6 m (MD = 5.40, 95%CI: 0.13 to 10.66) healing intervals and with particle size of 0.25-1 mm (MD = 7.68, 95%CI: 0.71 to 14.64), the addition of platelet-derived enhancer could significantly promote the bone neoformation.

Figuredepicts the comparative analysis of residual graft volume between the two groups. The results indicate that the addition of platelet-derived enhancers led to a significant reduction in residual graft volume (Fig.A, MD = −1.93, 95%CI: −2.25 to −1.61,< 0.001***). Sensitivity analysis by omitting the case–control study [] provided similar significant result (MD = −1.94, 95%CI: −2.26 to −1.62,< 0.001***). Publication bias assessment was non-significant, with-values for Egger's and Begg's tests at 0.194 and 0.325, respectively (Fig.D). Subgroup analyses were performed based on bone enhancer types (Fig.A), healing interval (Fig.B), and DBBM particle size (Fig.C). As a result, in PRF (MD = −4.32, 95%CI: −6.07 to −2.58) and PRGF (MD = −1.89, 95%CI: −2.21 to −1.56) subgroups and subgroups with 4 m (MD = −9.53, 95%CI: −13.72 to −5.35), 6 m (MD = −1.85, 95%CI: −2.18 to −1.53) or 8 m (MD = −3.22, 95%CI: −5.19 to −1.25) healing intervals and with particle sizes of 0.25-1 mm (MD = −6.24, 95%CI: −10.68 to −1.80) or 1-2 mm (MD = −2.26, 95%CI: −3.51 to −1.00), the addition of platelet-derived enhancer could significantly reduce the residual graft volume.

Figureillustrates the comparisons of the graft resorption rate and percentage of fibrous tissue between the two groups. The meta-analysis results indicate no significant difference in graft resorption rates between the two groups (Fig.A, MD = 0.24, 95%CI: −4.75 to 5.23,= 0.925). Subgroup analysis also shows that no significant difference was found between two groups both in subgroups with 4 m and 8 m healing intervals. The meta-analysis reveals no significant difference in the percentage of fibrous tissue between the groups (Fig.B, MD = −0.97, 95%CI: −7.33 to 5.40,= 0.765). Given the presence of significant heterogeneity, a sensitivity analysis was conducted, identifying no study significantly destabilizing the combined results (Fig.E). Publication bias assessment is non-significant, as evidenced by-values of 0.136 and 0.805 for Egger's and Begg's tests, respectively (Fig.F). Subgroup analyses were performed based on bone enhancer types (Fig.B), healing interval (Fig.C), and DBBM particle size (Fig.D). As a result, in all available subgroups, the addition of platelet-derived enhancer has no significant influence on the percentage of fibrous tissue.

Effect of platelet-derived bone enhancers in implant placement procedure

Figuredemonstrates the comparison of immediate implant stability, as assessed by RFA between the two groups in the implant placement procedure. The meta-analysis findings indicate that the adjunctive use of PRP/PRF during sinus floor elevation surgery does not significantly influence immediate implant stability after implantation procedure (Fig.A, MD = −4.62, 95%CI: −11.02 to 1.78,= 0.157). Sensitivity analyses, conducted due to the observed significant heterogeneity, identify one study [] causing notable instability on the pooled results (Fig.B). Upon exclusion of this study, the re-analyzed results still indicate no significant difference in immediate implant stability between the groups (Fig.C, MD = −1.64, 95% CI: −3.48 to 0.21,= 0.083).

Figuredemonstrates the comparison of implant survival rates between the two groups. Similarly, there was no significant difference in implant survival rates between the two groups (Fig.A, RR = 1.03, 95%CI: 0.98 to 1.07,= 0.252). Sensitivity analysis by omitting the case–control study [] provided similar non-significant result (RR = 1.03, 95%CI: 0.98 to 1.08,= 0.239). Publication bias assessment is significant, as evidenced by-value of 0.011 for Begg's test (Fig.D). So, trim and filling method was performed, but the adjusted pooling result remained non-significant (Fig.E, RR = 1.02, 95%CI: 0.98 to 1.06,= 0.390). Subgroup analyses were performed based on bone enhancer types (Fig.A), healing interval (Fig.B), and DBBM particle size (Fig.C). As a result, in all available subgroups, the addition of platelet-derived enhancer has no significant influence on the implant survival rate.

Discussion

In the oral and maxillofacial region, the complex anatomical features of the maxillary sinus and alveolar bone pose challenges for the implant repair of tooth loss, especially in cases of insufficient bone mass, where the difficulty of implant surgery is significantly increased. Currently, the use of the sinus floor elevation technique can effectively promote the increase of bone mass in the patient's implant area and usually achieves good osseointegration, thereby improving the patient's satisfaction. However, the bone substitute materials commonly used in surgery, such as autogenous bone, allogeneic bone, xenogeneic bone, or synthetic bone materials, all have their own limitations []. Therefore, exploring better bone substitute materials is of great significance for improving the success rate of surgery and the prognosis of patients.

Raghobear et al. [] in their 2005 study found that PRP had no beneficial effect on the wound healing and bone remodeling of autogenous bone grafts used to enhance the sinus floor. In this study, we found that the combination of PRP/PRF/PRGF with Bio-Oss significantly promoted the new bone formation in the first-stage sinus floor elevation surgery. This indicates that the addition of platelet derived bone enhancers can further improve the osteogenic biological effect of DBBM and provide a more reliable alveolar bone matrix condition for the second-stage implant placement, facilitating the second-stage surgical procedure and shortening the waiting time interval for the second surgery, shortening the total treatment cycle length, and potentially reducing the treatment costs associated with treatment during and long-term care and monitoring []. Secondly, we also found that the residual rate of Bio-Oss implants added with PRP was significantly reduced compared to the control group. This may be attributed to the increase in the local concentration of growth factors in PRP [,], which provides a more favorable environment for osteogenesis and accelerates the bone integration process []. The platelet concentrates contain various bioactive components, such as PDGFs, TGFs, VEGFs, and cytokines, which play key roles in osteogenesis, angiogenesis, and tissue healing []. PDGFs stimulate osteoblast proliferation and migration, promoting bone formation []. TGFs facilitate osteoblast differentiation and collagen matrix production, while VEGFs contribute to angiogenesis, ensuring an adequate blood supply to the regenerating tissues and helping to reduce the graft residual rate []. The anti-inflammatory cytokines in PRP, such as interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), can reduce the postoperative inflammatory response [,], thereby lowering the inflammatory damage to the tissues surrounding the implant.

PRP is a liquid concentrate obtained through centrifugation, yielding a high concentration of platelets, which are rich in growth factors. Due to its liquid state, PRP releases growth factors rapidly, making it ideal for immediate wound healing and regeneration []. However, the release is transient, and the effectiveness may be limited over time. On the other hand, PRF, which is obtained through a modified centrifugation process, results in a fibrin-rich matrix. This matrix not only retains platelets but also releases growth factors gradually, providing a sustained effect over a longer period, which is beneficial for bone regeneration in sinus augmentation []. PRGF is another platelet concentrate with a high fibrin content, but it differs from PRP and PRF in its preparation method. PRGF is typically derived from a higher concentration of platelets, leading to a more controlled release of growth factors, which can promote osteogenesis more effectively than PRP alone. PRGF is often favored for its consistency and higher-quality fibrin matrix []. These differences in preparation methods and growth factor release profiles highlight the complexity of their biological effects and the need for standardized protocols to optimize clinical outcomes.

However, although PRP shows positive effects on new bone formation and graft residual rate, this study did not find that PRP had a significant impact on the immediate and long-term stability of the implant. This may be because the addition of PRP/PRF, although it has a positive effect on osteogenesis in the early stage, after the sinus floor elevation surgery is completed, most of the grafts have been absorbed and replaced by new bone tissue, and therefore have almost no effective impact on the second reconstruction process. Clinical studies by Thor et al. [] indicate that whether or not PRP is used, the survival rate of implants after autogenous bone transplantation and one year of upper jaw loading is high, but the bone absorption in the PRP group is less. Another two studies [,] that observed the impact of PRP on the stability and survival of implants at different time points found that the use of PRP in sinus floor elevation surgery had no positive impact on the short-term and long-term stability of implant placement. This may be related to the multifactorial nature of implant stability, including the patient's lifestyle, oral hygiene status, implant design, and surgical techniques. Of course, a large number of patients and long-term follow-up are also the basis for clarifying the effectiveness of a treatment. Therefore, based on the current research on the addition of PRP/PRF in the first surgical process, the impact on the immediate stability and long-term survival of the implant in the second surgical process still needs to be evaluated through large-sample randomized studies as a standard for judging the effectiveness of the treatment method. While this study primarily focuses on short-term outcomes, such as bone formation and early survival, it is important to acknowledge that long-term implant survival and function are essential for evaluating the full success of treatments. The limited availability of long-term data in the current literature emphasizes the need for further research to address this gap. Short-term outcomes, while valuable for assessing immediate healing, may not fully reflect the sustainability of implants over time. Future studies should focus on long-term implant survival, functionality, and potential complications such as implant failure, bone resorption, or infection. Longitudinal studies will provide deeper insights into the durability and effectiveness of platelet-derived bone enhancers, ultimately guiding better clinical decision-making and treatment planning.

This study is subject to certain limitations. Firstly, as our included research originates from various countries across the globe, there lacks a unified standard for the preparation process of PRP and PRF among researchers. Variations exist in factors such as the volume of peripheral blood drawn, the magnitude of the centrifugal force applied, and the volume of PRP/PRF/PRGF used, all of which may potentially introduce bias to the combined results. Moreover, differences are also observed in the particle size and amount of bovine inorganic bone matrix used in the included studies, and some researches lack detailed descriptions of these factors, inevitably introducing further bias to the combined results. However, we have conducted a series of additional subgroup analyses to explore potential sources of heterogeneity. These analyses focus on factors that could contribute to variability, including the type of platelet-derived bone enhancer (PRP, PRF, or PRGF), the size of DBBM particles, the dosage of DBBM used, and the interval between sinus floor elevation and implant placement. Lastly, the current body of research is relatively small, with each study having limited sample sizes, restricting the sources of available evidence. There is a critical need for conducting more multi-center, large-sample, and prospective studies to provide additional, robust high-quality evidence, thereby compensating for the deficiencies of the current research.

Conclusions

The present study demonstrates that the addition of PRF or PRGF to the DBBM graft in the first stage of maxillary sinus floor augmentation significantly enhances the absorption rate of the graft material and new bone formation.This improvement in the osteoinductive biological effect of DBBM can lead to a more reliable alveolar bone matrix for the subsequent second-stage implant placement, facilitating the surgical procedure. No evidence support the application of PRP as an effective enhancer to DBBM in maxillary sinus floor elevation procedure. Furthermore, the application of PRP/PRF/PRGF during the first stage of surgery does not exert a significant impact on the immediate stability or long-term survival rate of the implants in the second stage.

Supplementary Information

Supplementary Material 1: Appendix 1. PRISMA checklist.

Supplementary Material 2: Supplementary Table S1. Quality assessment for the included studies.